

===== PAGE 1 =====
This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 
19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies.
February 23–25, 2021
978-1-9391 33-20-5
Open access to the Proceedings 
of the 19th USENIX Conference on 
File and Storage Technologies 
is sponsored by USENIX.
Evolution of Development Priorities in Key-value 
Stores Serving Large-scale Applications: 
The RocksDB Experience
Siying Dong, Andrew Kryczka, and Yanqin Jin, Facebook Inc.; 
Michael Stumm, University of Toronto
https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast21/presentation/dong

===== PAGE 2 =====
Evolution of Development Priorities in Key-value Stores Serving
Large-scale Applications: The RocksDB Experience
Siying Dong†, Andrew Kryczka†, Yanqin Jin† and Michael Stumm‡
†Facebook Inc., 1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA, U.S.A
‡University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Abstract
RocksDB is a key-value store targeting large-scale distributed
systems and optimized for Solid State Drives (SSDs). This pa-
per describes how our priorities in developing RocksDB have
evolved over the last eight years. The evolution is the result
both of hardware trends and of extensive experience running
RocksDB at scale in production at a number of organizations.
We describe how and why RocksDB’s resource optimization
target migrated from write ampliﬁcation, to space ampliﬁca-
tion, to CPU utilization. Lessons from running large-scale
applications taught us that resource allocation needs to be
managed across different RocksDB instances, that data for-
mat needs to remain backward and forward compatible to
allow incremental software rollout, and that appropriate sup-
port for database replication and backups are needed. Lessons
from failure handling taught us that data corruption errors
needed to be detected earlier and at every layer of the system.
1 Introduction
RocksDB [19, 54] is a high-performance persistent key-
value storage engine created in 2012 by Facebook, based
on Google’s LevelDB code base [22]. It is optimized for the
speciﬁc characteristics of Solid State Drives (SSDs), targets
large-scale (distributed) applications, and is designed as a
library component that is embedded in higher-level appli-
cations. As such, each RocksDB instance manages data on
storage devices of just a single server node; it does not handle
any inter-host operations, such as replication and load balanc-
ing, and it does not perform high-level operations, such as
checkpoints — it leaves the implementation of these opera-
tions to the application, but provides appropriate support so
they can do it effectively.
RocksDB and its various components are highly customiz-
able, allowing the storage engine to be tailored to a wide
spectrum of requirements and workloads; customizations can
include the write-ahead log (WAL) treatment, the compres-
sion strategy, and the compaction strategy (a process that
removes dead data and optimizes LSM-trees as described in
§2). RocksDB may be tuned for high write throughput or high
read throughput, for space efﬁciency, or something in between.
Due to its conﬁgurability, RocksDB is used by many appli-
cations, representing a wide range of use cases. At Facebook
alone, RocksDB is used by over 30 different applications, in
aggregate storing many hundreds of petabytes of production
data. Besides being used as a storage engine for databases
(e.g., MySQL [37], Rocksandra [6], CockroachDB [64], Mon-
goDB [40], and TiDB [27]), RocksDB is also used for the
following types of services with highly disparate characteris-
tics (summarized in Table 1):
• Stream processing : RocksDB is used to store stag-
ing data in Apache Flink [12], Kafka Stream [31],
Samza [43], and Facebook’s Stylus [15].
• Logging/queuing services: RocksDB is used by Face-
book’s LogDevice [5] (that uses both SSDs and HDDs),
Uber’s Cherami [8], and Iron.io [29].
• Index services : RocksDB is used by Facebook’s
Dragon [59] and Rockset [58].
• Caching on SSD: In-memory caching services, such as
Netﬂix’s EVCache [7], Qihoo’s Pika [51] and Redis [46],
store data evicted from DRAM on SSDs using RocksDB.
A prior paper presented an analysis of several database ap-
plications using RocksDB [11]. Table 2 summarizes some of
the key system metrics obtained from production workloads.
Having a storage engine that can support many different
use cases offers the advantage that the same storage engine
can be used across different applications. Indeed, having each
application build its own storage subsystem is problematic,
as doing so is challenging. Even simple applications need
to protect against media corruption using checksums, guar-
antee data consistency after crashes, issue the right system
calls in the correct order to guarantee durability of writes, and
handle errors returned from the ﬁle system in a correct man-
ner. A well-established common storage engine can deliver
sophistication in all those domains.
Additional beneﬁts are achieved from having a common
storage engine when the client applications run within a com-
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    33

===== PAGE 3 =====
Read/Write Read Types Special
Characteristics
Databases Mixed Get + Iterator Transactions
and backups
Stream Processing Write-Heavy Get or Iterator Time window
and checkpoints
Logging / Queues Write-Heavy Iterator Support HDD too
Index Services Read-Heavy Iterator Bulk loading
Cache Write-Heavy Get Can drop data
Table 1: RocksDB use cases and their workload characteristics
CPU Space Util Flash
Endurance
Read
Bandwidth
Stream Processing 11% 48% 16% 1.6%
Logging / Queues 46% 45% 7% 1.0%
Index Services 47% 61% 5% 10.0%
Cache 3% 78% 74% 3.5%
Table 2: System metrics for a typical use case from each
application category.
mon infrastructure: the monitoring framework, performance
proﬁling facilities, and debugging tools can all be shared. For
example, different application owners within a company can
take advantage of the same internal framework that reports
statistics to the same dashboard, monitor the system using the
same tools, and manage RocksDB using the same embedded
admin service. This consolidation not only allows expertise to
be easily reused among different teams, but also allows infor-
mation to be aggregated to common portals and encourages
developing tools to manage them.
Given the diverse set of applications that have adopted
RocksDB, it is natural that priorities for its development have
evolved. This paper describes how our priorities evolved over
the last eight years as we learned practical lessons from real-
world applications (both within Facebook and other organiza-
tions) and observed changes in hardware trends, causing us to
revisit some of our early assumptions. We also describe our
RocksDB development priorities for the near future.
§2 provides background on SSDs and Log-Structured
Merge (LSM) trees [45]. From the beginning, RocksDB chose
the LSM tree as its primary data structure to address the
asymmetry in read/write performance and the limited en-
durance of ﬂash-based SSDs. We believe LSM-trees have
served RocksDB well and argue they will remain a good ﬁt
even with upcoming hardware trends (§3). The LSM-tree data
structure is one of the reasons RocksDB can accommodate
different types applications with disparate requirements.
§3 describes how our primary optimization target shifted
from minimizing write ampliﬁcation to minimizing space
ampliﬁcation, and from optimizing performance to optimizing
efﬁciency.
§4 describes lessons we learned serving large-scale dis-
tributed systems; for example: ( i) resource allocation must
be managed across multiple RocksDB instances, since a sin-
gle server may host multiple instances; (ii) data format must
be backward and forward compatible, since RocksDB soft-
ware updates are deployed/rolled-back incrementally; and
(iii) proper support for database replication and backups are
important.
§5 describes our experiences on failure handling. Large-
scale distributed systems typically use replication for fault
tolerance and high availability. However, single node failures
must be properly handled to achieve that goal. We have found
that simply identifying and propagating ﬁle system and check-
sum errors is not sufﬁcient. Rather, faults (such as bitﬂips) at
every layer must be identiﬁed as early as possible and appli-
cations should be able to specify policies for handling them
in an automated way when possible.
§6 presents our thoughts on improving the key-value inter-
face. While the core interface is simple and powerful given
its ﬂexibility, it limits the performance for some critical use
cases. We describe our support for user-deﬁned timestamps
separate from the key and value.
§8 lists several areas where RockDB would beneﬁt from
future research.
2 Background
The characteristics of ﬂash have profoundly impacted the de-
sign of RocksDB. The asymmetry in read/write performance
and limited endurance pose challenges and opportunities in
the design of data structures and system architectures. As
such, RocksDB employs ﬂash-friendly data structures and
optimizes for modern hardware.
2.1 Embedded storage on ﬂash based SSDs
Over the last decade, we have witnessed the proliferation of
ﬂash-based SSD for serving online data. The low latency
and high throughput device not only challenged software to
take advantage of its full capabilities, but also transformed
how many stateful services are implemented. An SSD offers
hundreds of thousands of Input/Output Operations per Second
(IOPS) for both of read and write, which is thousands of times
faster than a spinning hard drive. It can also support hundreds
of MBs of bandwidth. Yet high write bandwidth cannot be
sustained due to a limited number of program/erase cycles.
These factors provide an opportunity to rethink the storage
engine’s data structures to optimize for this hardware.
The high performance of the SSD, in many cases, also
shifted the performance bottleneck from device I/O to the
network for both of latency and throughput. It became more
attractive for applications to design their architecture to store
data on local SSDs rather than use a remote data storage ser-
vice. This increased the demand for a key-value store engines
that are embedded in applications.
34    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 4 =====
L5_1L4_2
L1_1L1_2
L4_3L4_4
L2_1L2_2L2_3L2_4
L4_5L4_6
L3_1L3_2L3_3L3_4L3_5L3_6
L4_7L4_8
L0_1MemTableLevel 0Level 1Level 2Level 3Level 4
Figure 1: RocksDB LSM-tree using leveled compaction. Each
white box is an SSTable.
RocksDB was created to address these requirements. We
wanted to create a ﬂexible key-value store to serve a wide
range of applications using local SSD drives while optimizing
for the characteristics of SSDs. LSM trees played a key role
in achieving these goals.
2.2 RocksDB architecture
RocksDB uses Log-Structured Merge (LSM) trees [45] as its
primary data structure to store data.
Writes. Whenever data is written to RocksDB, it is added
to an in-memory write buffer called MemTable, as well as an
on-disk Write Ahead Log (W AL). Memtable is implemented
as a skiplist so keep the data ordered with O(log n) insert and
search overhead. The W AL is used for recovery after a failure,
but is not mandatory. Once the size of the MemTable reaches
a conﬁgured size, then (i) the MemTable and WAL become
immutable, (ii) a new MemTable and W AL are allocated for
subsequent writes, ( iii) the contents of the MemTable are
ﬂushed to a “Sorted String Table” (SSTable) data ﬁle on disk,
and (iv) the ﬂushed MemTable and associated WAL are dis-
carded. Each SSTable stores data in sorted order, divided into
uniformly-sized blocks. Each SSTable also has an index block
with one index entry per SSTable block for binary search.
Compaction. The LSM tree has multiple levels of SSTa-
bles, as shown in Fig. 1. The newest SSTables are created
by MemTable ﬂushes and placed in Level-0. Levels higher
than Level-0 are created by a process called compaction. The
size of SSTables on a given level are limited by conﬁgura-
tion parameters. When level-L’s size target is exceeded, some
SSTables in level-L are selected and merged with the over-
lapping SSTables in level-(L+1). In doing so, deleted and
overwritten data is removed, and the table is optimized for
read performance and space efﬁciency. This process grad-
ually migrates written data from Level-0 to the last level.
Compaction I/O is efﬁcient as it can be parallelized and only
involves bulk reads and writes of entire ﬁles.
Level-0 SSTables have overlapping key ranges, as each
SSTable covers a full sorted run. Later levels each contain
only one sorted run so the SSTables in these levels contain a
partition of their level’s sorted run.
Reads. In the read path, a key lookup occurs at each suc-
cessive level until the key is found or it is determined that the
Compaction
Write
Ampliﬁcation
Max Space
Overhead
Avg Space
Overhead
#I/O per Get()
with bloom ﬁlter
# I/O per Get()
without ﬁlter
# I/O per
iterator seek
Leveled 16.07 9.8% 9.5% 0.99 1.7 1.84
Tiered 4.8 94.4% 45.5% 1.03 3.39 4.80
FIFO 2.14 N/A N/A 1.16 528 967
Table 3: Write ampliﬁcation, overhead and read I/O for three
major compaction types under RocksDB 5.9. Number of
sorted runs is set to 12 for Tiered Compaction, and 20 bloom
ﬁlter bits per key are used for FIFO Compaction. Direct I/O is
used and block cache size is set to be 10% of fully compacted
DB size. Write ampliﬁcation is calculated as total SSTable ﬁle
writes vs number of Mem-Table bytes ﬂushed. WAL writes
are not included.
key is not present in the last level. It begins by searching all
MemTables, followed by all Level-0 SSTables, and then the
SSTables in successively higher levels. At each of these levels,
binary search is used. Bloom ﬁlters are used to eliminate an
unnecessary search within an SSTable ﬁle. Scans require that
all levels be searched.
RocksDB supports multiple different types of compaction.
Leveled Compaction was adapted from LevelDB and then
improved [19]. In this compaction style, levels are assigned
exponentially increasing size targets as exempliﬁed by the
dashed boxes in Fig. 1. Tiered Compaction (called Univer-
sal Compaction in RocksDB) is similar to what is used by
Apache Cassandra or HBase. Multiple sorted runs are lazily
compacted together, either when there are too many sorted
runs, or the ratio between total DB size over the size of the
largest sorted run exceeds a conﬁgurable threshold. Finally,
FIFO Compaction simply discards old ﬁles once the DB hits
a size limit and only performs lightweight compactions. It
targets in-memory caching applications.
Being able to conﬁgure the type of compaction allows
RocksDB to serve a wide range of use cases. By using differ-
ent compaction styles, RocksDB can be conﬁgured as read
friendly, write friendly, or very write friendly for special cache
workloads. However, application owners will need to consider
trade-offs among the different metrics for their speciﬁc use
case [2]. A lazier compaction algorithm improves write am-
pliﬁcation and write throughput, but read performance suffers,
while a more aggressive compaction sacriﬁces write perfor-
mance but allows for faster reads. Services like logging or
stream processing can use a write heavy setup while database
services need a balanced approach. Table 3 depicts this ﬂexi-
bility by way of micro-benchmark results.
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    35

===== PAGE 5 =====
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
0 5 10 15 20 25
Writes per 1TB data 
MB/s 
Write Amplification 
Tiered compaction Leveled compaction
Figure 2: Survey of write ampliﬁcation and write rate across
42 randomly sampled ZippyDB and MyRocks applications.
3 Evolution of resource optimization targets
Here we describe how our resource optimization target
evolved over time: from write ampliﬁcation to space am-
pliﬁcation to CPU utilization.
Write ampliﬁcation
When we started developing RocksDB, we initially focused
on saving ﬂash erase cycles and thus write ampliﬁcation,
following the general view of the community at the time
(e.g., [34]). This was rightly an important target for many ap-
plications, in particular for those with write-heavy workloads
(Table 1) where it continues to be an issue.
Write ampliﬁcation emerges at two levels. SSDs them-
selves introduce write ampliﬁcation: by our observations be-
tween 1.1 and 3. Storage and database software also generate
write ampliﬁcation; this can sometimes be as high as 100
(e.g., when an entire 4KB/8KB/16KB page is written out for
changes of less than 100 bytes).
Leveled Compaction in RocksDB usually exhibits write
ampliﬁcation between 10 and 30, which is several times better
than when using B-trees in many cases. For example, when
running LinkBench on MySQL, RocksDB issues only 5% as
many writes per transaction as InnoDB, a B-tree based storage
engine [37]. Still, write ampliﬁcation in the 10–30 range is too
high for write-heavy applications. For this reason we added
Tiered Compaction, which brings write ampliﬁcation down
to the 4–10 range, although with lower read performance; see
Table 3. Figure 2 depicts RocksDB’s write ampliﬁcation under
different data ingestion rates. RocksDB application owners
often pick a compaction method to reduce write ampliﬁcation
when the write rate is high, and compact more aggressively
when the write rate is low to achieve space efﬁciency and read
performance goals.
Space ampliﬁcation
After several years of development, we observed that for most
applications, space utilization was far more important than
write ampliﬁcation, given that neither ﬂash write cycles nor
write overhead were constraining. In fact the number of IOPS
utilized in practice was low compared to what the SSD could
Dynamic Leveled LevelDB-style
Compaction Compaction
# keys
(millions)
Fully compac-
ted size (GB)
Steady DB
size (GB)
Space over-
head(%)
Fully compac-
ted size (GB)
Steady DB
size (GB)
Space over-
head(%)
200 12.0 13.5 12.4 12.0 15.1 25.6
400 24.0 26.9 11.8 24.0 26.9 12.2
600 36.0 40.4 12.2 36.4 42.5 16.9
800 48.0 54.2 12.7 48.3 57.9 19.7
1,000 60.1 67.5 12.4 60.3 73.8 22.4
Table 4: RocksDB space efﬁciency measured in a micro-
benchmark: data is prepopulated and each write is to a key
chosen randomly from the pre-populated key space. RocksDB
5.9 with all default options. Constant 2MB/s write rate.
provide (yet still high enough to make HDDs unattractive,
even when ignoring maintenance overhead). As a result, we
shifted our resource optimization target to disk space.
Fortunately, LSM-trees also work well when optimizing for
disk space due to their non-fragmented data layout. However,
we saw an opportunity to improve Leveled Compaction by re-
ducing the amount of dead data (i.e., deleted and overwritten
data) in the LSM tree. We developed Dynamic Leveled Com-
paction, where the size of each level in the tree is automati-
cally adjusted based on the actual size of the last level (instead
of setting the size of each level statically) [19]. This method
achieves better and more stable space efﬁciency than Leveled
Compaction. Table 3 shows space efﬁciency measured in a
random write benchmark: Dynamic Leveled Compaction lim-
its space overhead to 13%, while Leveled Compaction can
add more than 25% . Moreover, space overhead in the worst
case under Leveled Compaction can be as high as 90%, while
it is stable for dynamic leveling. In fact, for UDB, one of
Facebooks main databases, the space footprint was reduced
to 50% when InnoDB was replaced by RocksDB [36].
CPU utilization
An issue of concern sometimes raised is that SSDs have be-
come so fast that software is no longer able to take advantage
of their full potential. That is, with SSDs, the bottleneck has
shifted from the storage device to the CPU, so fundamental
improvements to the software are necessary. We do not share
this concern based on our experience, and we do not expect
it to become an issue with future NAND ﬂash based SSDs
for two reasons. First, only a few applications are limited by
the IOPS provided by the SSDs; as discussed in §4.2, most
applications are limited by space.
Second, we ﬁnd that any server with a high-end CPU has
more than enough compute power to saturate one high-end
SSD. RocksDB has never had an issue making full use of
SSD performance in our environment. Of course, it is possi-
ble to conﬁgure a system that results in the CPU becoming a
36    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 6 =====
0%
10 %
20 %
30 %
40 %
50 %
60 %
70 %
80 %
90 %
10 0%
Flash endurance
0%
10 %
20 %
30 %
40 %
50 %
60 %
70 %
80 %
90 %
10 0%
Read bandwidth
0%
10 %
20 %
30 %
40 %
50 %
60 %
70 %
80 %
90 %
10 0%
Space
0%
10 %
20 %
30 %
40 %
50 %
60 %
70 %
80 %
90 %
10 0%
CPU
Figure 3: Resource utilization across four metrics. Each line
represents a different deployment with a different workload.
Measurements were taken over the course of one month. All
numbers are the average across all hosts in the deployment.
CPU and read bandwidth are for the highest hour during the
month. Flash endurance and space utilization are average
across the entire month.
bottleneck; e.g., a system with one CPU and multiple SSDs.
However, effective systems are typically those conﬁgured to
be well-balanced, which today’s technology allows. Inten-
sive write-dominated workloads may also cause the CPU to
become a bottleneck. For some, this can be mitigated by con-
ﬁguring RocksDB to use a more lightweight compression
option. For the other cases, the workload may simply not
be suitable for SSDs since it would exceed the typical ﬂash
endurance budget that allows the SSD to last 2-5 years.
To conﬁrm our view, we surveyed 42 different deployments
of ZippyDB [65] and MyRocks in production, each serving
a different application. Fig. 3 shows the result. Most of the
workloads are space constrained. Some are indeed CPU heavy,
but hosts are generally not fully utilized to leave headroom
for growth and handling data center or region-level failures
(or because of misconﬁgurations). Most of these deployments
include hundreds of hosts, so averages give an idea of the
resource needs for these use cases, considering that workloads
can be freely (re-)balanced among those hosts (§4).
Nevertheless, reducing CPU overheads has become an im-
portant optimization target, given that the low hanging fruit
of reducing space ampliﬁcation has been harvested. Reduc-
ing CPU overheads improves the performance of the few
applications where the CPU is indeed constraining. More
importantly, optimizations that reduce CPU overheads allow
for hardware conﬁgurations that are more cost-effective —
until several years ago, the price of CPUs and memory was
reasonably low relative to SSDs, but CPU and memory prices
have increased substantially, so decreasing CPU overhead
and memory usage has increased in importance. Early efforts
to lower CPU overhead included the introduction of preﬁx
bloom ﬁlters, applying the bloom ﬁlter before index lookups,
and other bloom ﬁlter improvements. There remains room for
further improvement.
Adapting to newer technologies
New architectural improvements related to SSDs could eas-
ily disrupt RocksDB’s relevancy. For example, open-channel
SSDs [50, 66], multi-stream SSD [68] and ZNS [4] promise
to improve query latency and save ﬂash erase cycles. How-
ever, these new technologies would beneﬁt only a minority of
the applications using RocksDB, given that most applications
are space constrained, not erase cycle or latency constrained.
Further, having RocksDB accommodate these technologies
directly would challenge the uniﬁed RocksDB experience.
One possible path worth exploring would be to delegate the
accommodation of these technologies to the underlying ﬁle
system, perhaps with RocksDB providing additional hints.
In-storage computing potentially might offer signiﬁcant
gains, but it is unclear how many RocksDB applications would
actually beneﬁt from this. We suspect it would be challenging
for RocksDB to adapt to in-storage computing, likely requir-
ing API changes to the entire software stack to fully exploit.
We look forward to future research on how best to do this.
Disaggregated (remote) storage appears to be a much more
interesting optimization target and is a current priority. So
far, our optimizations have assumed the ﬂash was locally at-
tached, as our system infrastructure is primarily conﬁgured
this way.However, faster networks currently allow many more
I/Os to be served remotely, so the performance of running
RocksDB with remote storage has become viable for an in-
creasing number of applications. With remote storage, it is
easier to make full use of both CPU and SSD resources at
the same time, because they can be separately provisioned
on demand (something much more difﬁcult to achieve with
locally attached SSDs). As a result, optimizing RocksDB for
remote ﬂash storage has become a priority. We are currently
addressing the challenge of long I/O latency by trying to con-
solidate and parallelize I/Os. We have adapted RocksDB to
handle transient failures, pass QoS requirements to underly-
ing systems, and report proﬁling information. However, more
work is needed.
Storage Class Memory (SCM) is a promising technology.
We are investigating how best to take advantage of it. Several
possibilities are worth considering: 1. use SCM as an exten-
sion of DRAM — this raises the questions of how best to
implement key data structures (e.g., block cache or memtable)
with mixed DRAM and SCM, and what overheads are intro-
duced when trying to exploit the offered persistency; 2. use
SCM as the main storage of the database, but we note that
RocksDB tends to be bottlenecked by space or CPU, rather
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    37

===== PAGE 7 =====
than I/O; and 3. use SCM for the WALs, but this raises the
question of whether this use case alone justiﬁes the costs
of SCM, considering that we only need a small staging area
before it is moved to SSD.
Main Data Structure Revisited
We continuously revisit the question of whether LSM-trees
remain appropriate, but continue to come to the conclusion
that they do. The price of SSDs hasn’t dropped enough to
change the space and ﬂash endurance bottlenecks for most
use cases and the alternative of trading SSD usage with CPU
or DRAM only makes sense for a few applications. While the
main conclusion remains the same, we frequently hear users’
demands for write ampliﬁcation lower than what RocksDB
can provide. Nevertheless, we noted that when object sizes
are large, write ampliﬁcation can be reduced by separating
key and value (e.g. WiscKey [35] and ForrestDB [1]), so we
are adding this to RocksDB (called BlobDB).
4 Lessons on serving large-scale systems
RocksDB is a building block for a wide variety of large-scale
distributed systems with disparate requirements. Over time,
we learned that improvements were needed with respect to
resource management, W AL treatment, batched ﬁle deletions,
data format compatibility, and conﬁguration management.
Resource management
Large-scale distributed data services typically partition the
data into shards that are distributed across multiple server
nodes for storage. The size of shards is limited, because a
shard is the unit for load balancing and replication, and be-
cause shards are copied between nodes atomically for this
purpose. As a result, each server node will typically host tens
or hundreds of shards. In our context, a separate RocksDB
instance is used to service each shard, which means that a
storage host will have many RocksDB instances running on it.
These instances can either all run in one single address space,
or each in its own address space.
The fact that a host may run many RocksDB instances
has implications on resource management. Given that the
instances share the host’s resources, the resources need to be
managed both globally (per host) and locally (per instance)
to ensure they are used fairly and efﬁciently. When running
in single process mode, having global resource limits is im-
portant, including for (1) memory for write buffer and block
cache, (2) compaction I/O bandwidth, (3) compaction threads,
(4) total disk usage and (5) ﬁle deletion rate (described below),
and such limits are potentially needed on a per-I/O device
basis. Local resource limits are also needed, for example to en-
sure that a single instance cannot utilize an excessive amount
of any resource. RocksDB allows applications to create one
or more resource controllers (implemented as C++ objects
passed to different DB objects) for each type of resource and
also do so on a per instance basis. Finally, it is important to
support prioritization among RocksDB instances to make sure
a resource is prioritized for the instances that need it most.
Another lesson learned when running multiple instances
in one process: liberally spawning unpooled threads can be
problematic, especially if the threads are long-lived. Having
too many threads increases the probability of CPU, causes
excessive context switching overhead, and makes debugging
extremely difﬁcult, and I/O spikes. If a RocksDB instance
needs to perform some work using a thread that may go to
sleep or wait on a condition, then it is better to use a thread
pool where size and resource usage can be easily capped.
Global (per host) resource management is more challenging
when the RocksDB instances run in separate processes, given
that each shard only has local information. Two strategies can
be applied. First, each instance is conﬁgured to use resources
conservatively, as opposed to greedily. With compaction, for
example, each instance can initiate fewer compactions than
“normal,” ramping up only when compactions are behind. The
downside of this strategy is that the global resources may
not be fully exploited, leading to sub-optimal resource usage.
The second, operationally more challenging strategy is for
the instances to share resource usage information amongst
themselves and to adapt accordingly in an attempt to optimize
resource usage more globally. More work will be needed to
improve host-wide resource management in RocksDB.
W AL treatment
Traditional databases tend to force a write-ahead-log (W AL)
write upon every write operation to ensure durability. In con-
trast, large-scale distributed storage systems typically repli-
cate data for performance and availability, and they do so with
various consistency guarantees. For example, if copies of the
same data exist in multiple replicas, and one replica becomes
corrupted or inaccessible, then the storage system uses valid
replica(s) from other unaffected hosts to rebuild the replica of
the failed host. For such systems, RocksDB W AL writes are
less critical. Further, distributed systems often have their own
replication logs (e.g., Paxos logs), in which case RocksDB
W AL are not needed at all.
We learned it is helpful to provide options for tuning W AL
sync behavior to meet the needs of different applications.
Speciﬁcally, we introduced differentiated WAL operating
modes: (i) synchronous W AL writes, (i) buffered W AL writes,
and (i) no WAL writes at all. For buffered WAL treatment,
W AL is periodically written out to disk in the background at
low priority so as not to impact RocksDB’s trafﬁc latencies.
Rate-limited ﬁle deletions
RocksDB typically interacts with the underlying storage de-
vice via a ﬁle system. These ﬁle systems are ﬂash-SSD-aware;
e.g., XFS, with realtime discard, may issue a TRIM com-
mand [28] to the SSD whenever a ﬁle is deleted. TRIM com-
mands are commonly believed to improve performance and
ﬂash endurance [21], as validated by our production experi-
ence. However, it may also cause performance issues. TRIM
38    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 8 =====
is more disruptive than we originally thought: in addition
to updating the address mapping (most often in the SSD’s
internal memory), the SSD ﬁrmware also needs to write these
changes to FTL’s1 journal in ﬂash, which in turn may trigger
SSD’s internal garbage collection, causing considerable data
movement with an attendant negative impact on foreground
IO latencies. To avoid TRIM activity spikes and associated
increases in I/O latency, we introduced rate limiting for ﬁle
deletion to prevent multiple ﬁles from being deleted simulta-
neously (which happens after compactions).
Data format compatibility
Large scale distributed applications run their services on many
hosts, and they expect zero downtime. As a result, software
upgrades are incrementally rolled out across the hosts; and
when issues arise, the updates are rolled back. In light of
continuous deployment [56], these software upgrades occur
frequently; RocksDB issues a new release once a month.For
this reason, it is important that the data on disk remain both
backward and forward compatible across the different soft-
ware versions. A newly upgraded (or rolled back) RocksDB
instance must be able to make sense of the data stored on disk
by the previous instance. Further, RocksDB data ﬁles may
need to be copied between distributed instances for replica
building or load balancing, and these instances may be run-
ning different versions. A lack of a forward compatibility
guarantee caused operational difﬁculties in some RocksDB
deployments, which led us to add the guarantee.
RocksDB goes to great lengths to ensure data remains both
forward and backward compatible (except for new features).
This is challenging both technically and process-wise, but we
have found the effort pays off. For backwards compatibility,
RocksDB must be able to understand all formats previously
written to disk; this adds software and maintenance complex-
ities. For forward compatibility, future data formats need to
be understood, and we aim to maintain forward compatibility
for at least one year. This can be achieved in part, by using
generic techniques, such as those used by Protocol Buffer [63]
or Thrift [62]. For conﬁguration ﬁle entries, RocksDB needs
to be able to identify new ﬁelds and use best-effort guesses on
how to apply the conﬁguration or when to discard. We con-
tinuously test different versions of RocksDB with different
versions of its data.
Managing conﬁgurations
RocksDB is highly conﬁgurable so that applications can op-
timize for their workload. However, we have found conﬁg-
uration management to be a challenge. Initially, RocksDB
inherited LevelDB’s method of conﬁguring parameters where
the parameter options were directly embedded in the code.
This caused two problems. First, parameter options were often
tied to the data stored on disk, causing potential compatibility
issues when data ﬁles created using one option could not be
opened by a RocksDB instance newly conﬁgured with another
1FTL: Flash Translation Layer.
Compac- Compre- SSTable Plug-in
Conﬁg Area: tion I/O ssion ﬁle fcts
Conﬁgurations: 14 4 2 7 6
Table 5: The number of distinct conﬁgurations used across 39
ZippyDB deployments
option. Second, conﬁguration options not explicitly speciﬁed
by the code were automatically set to RocksDB’s default val-
ues. When a RocksDB software update included changes to
the default conﬁguration parameters (e.g., to increase memory
usage or compaction parallelism), applications would some-
times experience unexpected consequences.
To address these issues, RocksDB ﬁrst introduced the abil-
ity for a RocksDB instance to open a database with a string
parameter that included conﬁguration options. Later RocksDB
introduced support for optionally storing an options ﬁle along
with the database. We also introduced two tools: ( i) a vali-
dation tool that validates whether the options for opening a
database was compatible with the target database; and (ii) a
migration tool rewrites a database to be compatible with the
desired options (although this tool is limited).
A more serious problem with RocksDB conﬁguration man-
agement is the large number of conﬁguration options. In the
early years of RocksDB, we made the design choice of sup-
porting a high degree of customization: we introduced many
new knobs, and introduced the support of pluggable compo-
nents, all to allow applications to realize their performance
potential. This proved to be a successful strategy for gaining
initial traction early on. However, a common complaint now
is that there are far too many options and that it is too difﬁcult
to understand their effects; i.e., it has become very difﬁcult to
specify an “optimal” conﬁguration.
More daunting beyond having many conﬁguration parame-
ters to tune is the fact that the optimal conﬁguration depends
not just on the system that has RocksDB embedded, but also
on the workload generated by the applications above them.
Consider, for example, ZippyDB [65], an in-house developed,
large-scale distributed key-value store that uses RocksDB
on its nodes. ZippyDB serves numerous different applica-
tions, sometimes individually, sometimes in a multi-tenant
setup. Although signiﬁcant efforts go into using uniform con-
ﬁgurations across all ZippyDB use cases wherever possible,
the workloads are so different for the different use cases, a
uniform conﬁguration is not practically feasible when perfor-
mance is important. Table 5 shows that across the 39 ZippyDB
deployments we sampled, over 25 distinct conﬁgurations.
Tuning conﬁguration parameters is also particularly chal-
lenging for systems with embedded RocksDB that are shipped
to third parties. Consider a third party using a database such
as MySQL or ZippyDB within one of their applications. The
third party will typically know very little about RocksDB
and how it is best tuned. And the database owners have little
appetite for tuning the systems of their clients.
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    39

===== PAGE 9 =====
These real-world lessons triggered changes in our conﬁgu-
ration support strategy. We have spent considerable effort on
improving out-of-box performance and simplifying conﬁgura-
tions. Our current focus is on providing automatic adaptivity,
while continuing to support extensive explicit conﬁguration,
given that RocksDB continues to server specialized applica-
tions. We note that pursuing adaptivity while retaining explicit
conﬁgurability creates signiﬁcant code maintenance overhead,
we believe the beneﬁts of having a consolidated storage en-
gine outweighs the code complexity.
Replication and backup support
RocksDB is a single node library. The applications that
use RocksDB are responsible for replication and backups
if needed. Each application implements these functions in
its own way (for legitimate reasons), so it is important that
RocksDB offer appropriate support these functions.
Bootstrapping a new replica by copying all the data from
an existing one can be done in two ways. First, all the keys
can be read from a source replica and then written to the desti-
nation replica (logical copying). On the source side, RocksDB
supports data scanning operations by offering the ability to
minimize the impact on concurrent online queries; e.g., by
providing the option to not cache the result of these operations
and thus prevent cache trashing. On the destination side, bulk
loading is supported and also optimized for this scenario.
Second, bootstrapping a new replica can be done by copy-
ing SSTables and other ﬁles directly ( physical copying ).
RocksDB assists physical copying by identifying existing
database ﬁles at a current point in time, and preventing them
from being deleted or mutated. Supporting physical copying
is an important reason RocksDB stores data on an underlying
ﬁle system, as it allows each application to use its own tools.
We believe the potential performance gains of RocksDB di-
rectly using a block device interface or heavily integrating
with FTL does not outweigh the aforementioned beneﬁt.
Backup is an important feature for most databases and other
applications. For backups, applications have the same logi-
cal vs. physical choice as with replication. One difference
between backups and replication is that applications often
need to manage multiple backups. While most applications
implement their own backups (to accommodate their own
requirements), RocksDB provides a backup engine for appli-
cations to use if their backup requirements are simple.
We see two areas for further improvement in this area, but
both require changes to the key-value API; they are discussed
in §6. The ﬁrst involves applying updates in a consistent
order on different replicas, which introduces performance
challenges. The second involves performance issues surround-
ing write requests that are issued one at a time and the fact
that replicas can fall behind and applications may wish these
replicas to catch up faster. Various solutions have been im-
plemented by different applications to address these issues,
but they all have limitations [20]. The challenge is that ap-
plications cannot issue writes out of order and do snapshot
reads with their own sequence numbers because RocksDB
does not currently support multi-versioning with user deﬁned
timestamps.
5 Lessons on failure handling
Through production experience, we have learned three major
lessons about failure handling. First, data corruption needs to
be detected early to minimize the risk of data unavailability
or loss, and in doing so to pinpoint where the error originated.
Second, integrity protection must cover the entire system to
prevent silent corruptions from being exposed to RocksDB
clients or spreading to other replicas (see Fig. 4). Third, errors
need to be treated in a differentiated manner.
Frequency of silent corruptions
RocksDB users do not usually use data protection by SSD
(e.g. DIF/DIX) for performance reason, and storage media cor-
ruptions are detected by RocksDB block checksums, which
is a routine feature for all mature databases so we skip the
analysis here. CPU/memory corruption does happen rarely
and it is difﬁcult to accurately quantify. Applications that use
RocksDB often run data consistency checks that compare
replicas for integrity. This catches errors, but those could have
been introduced either by RocksDB or by the client applica-
tion (e.g., when replicating, backing up, or restoring data).
We found that the frequency of corruptions introduced at
the RocksDB level can be estimated by comparing primary
and secondary indexes in MyRocks database tables that have
both; any inconsistencies whould have been introduced at
the RocksDB level, including CPU or memory corruptions.
Based on our measurements, corruptions are introduced at
the RocksDB level roughly once every three months for each
100PB of data. Worse, in 40% of those cases, the corruption
had already propagated to other replicas.
Data corruptions also occur when transferring data, often
because of software bugs. For example, a bug in the underly-
ing storage system when handling network failures, caused
us to see, over a period of time, roughly 17 checksum mis-
matches for every petabyte of physical data transferred.
Multi-layer protection
Data corruption needs to be detected as early as possible to
minimize downtime and data loss. Most RocksDB applica-
tions have their data replicated on multiple hosts; when a
checksum mismatch is detected, the corrupt replica is dis-
carded and replaced with a correct one. However, this is a
viable option only as long as a correct replica still exists.
Today, RocksDB checksums ﬁle data at multiple levels to
identify corruption in the layers beneath it. These, as well as
the planned application layer checksum, are shown in Fig. 4.
Multiple levels of checksums are important, primarily because
they help detect corruptions early and because they protect
against different types of threats. Block checksums, inherited
40    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 10 =====
from LevelDB, prevent data corrupted at or below the ﬁle sys-
tem from being exposed to the client. File checksums, added
in 2020, protect against corruption caused by the underlying
storage system from being propagated to other replicas and
against corruption caused when transferring SSTable ﬁles
over the wire. For W AL ﬁles, handoff checksums enable efﬁ-
cient early detection of corruptions at write time.
Block integrity. Each SSTable block or W AL fragment has
a checksum attached to it, generated when the data is created.
Unlike the ﬁle checksum that is veriﬁed only when the ﬁle is
moved, this checksum is veriﬁed every time the data is read,
due to its smaller scope. Doing so prevents data corrupted by
the storage layer from being exposed to RocksDB clients.
File integrity. File contents are particularly at risk of be-
ing corrupted during transfer operations; e.g., for backups or
when distributing SSTable ﬁles. To address this, SSTables are
protected by their own checksum, generated when the table
is created. An SSTable’s checksum is recorded in the meta-
data’s SSTable ﬁle entry, and is validated with the SSTable
ﬁle wherever it is transferred. However, we note that other
ﬁles, such as W AL ﬁles, are still not protected this way.
Handoff integrity. An established technique for detecting
write corruptions early is to generate a handoff checksum
on the data to be written to the underlying ﬁle system, and
pass it down along with the data, where it is veriﬁed by the
lower layers [48, 70]. We wish to protect WAL writes using
such a write API, since unlike SSTables, W ALs beneﬁt from
incremental validation on each append. Unfortunately, local
ﬁle systems rarely support this — some, specialized stacks,
such as Oracle ASM [49] do, however.
On the other hand, when running on remote storage, the
write API can be changed to accept a checksum, hooking into
the storage service’s internal ECC. RocksDB can use check-
sum combining techniques on the existing WAL fragment
checksums to efﬁciently compute a write handoff checksum.
Since our storage service performs write-time veriﬁcation, we
expect it to be extremely infrequent for corruption detection
to be delayed until read time.
End-to-end protection
While the layers of protection described above prevent clients
from being exposed to corrupt data in many cases, they are not
comprehensive. One deﬁciency of the protections mentioned
so far is that data is unprotected above the ﬁle I/O layer; e.g.,
data in MemTable and the block cache. Data corrupted at this
level will be undetectable and thus will eventually be exposed
to the user. Further, ﬂush or compaction operations can persist
corrupted data, making the corruption permanent.
Key-value integrity. To address this problem, we are cur-
rently implementing per-key-value checksums to detect cor-
ruptions that occur above the ﬁle I/O layer. This checksum
will be transferred along with the key/value wherever it is
copied, although we will elide it from ﬁle data where alterna-
tive integrity protection already exists.
Underlying
Storage
Memtables
Per K/V 
checksums
SSTable
Block 
checksums
SSTable
Block 
checksums
DB Metadata
File 
checksums
Another Replica
[Replica File Copy]
Check file checksums
Backup 
Storage
[Backup/Restore]
Check file checksums
[Compaction]
check block and 
K/V cksums
[Memtable
Flush]
Check K/V 
checksums
Client
[Write]
Pass in K/V 
Checksums
FS Handoff
Checksums
[Read]
Check block and 
KV Checksums
Figure 4: Four Types of Checksums
Severity-based error handling
Most of the faults RocksDB encounters are errors returned by
the underlying storage system. These errors can stem from
a multitude of issues, from severe problems like a read-only
ﬁle system, to transient problems like a full disk or a network
error accessing remote storage. Early on, RocksDB reacted to
such issues either by simply returning error messages to the
client or by permanently halting all write operations.
Today, we aim to interrupt RocksDB operations only if the
error is not locally recoverable; e.g., transient network errors
should not require user intervention to restart the RocksDB
instance. To implement this, we improved RocksDB to peri-
odically retry resume operations after encountering an error
classiﬁed as transient. As a result, we obtain operational ben-
eﬁts as clients do not need to manually mitigate RocksDB for
a signiﬁcant portion of faults that occur.
6 Lessons on the key-value interface
The core key-value (KV) interface is surprisingly versatile.
Almost all storage workloads can be served by a datastore
with a KV API; we have rarely seen an application not able to
implement functionality using this interface. That is perhaps
why KV-stores are so popular. The KV interface is generic.
Both keys and values are variable-length byte arrays. Appli-
cations have great ﬂexibility in determining what information
to pack into each key and value, and they can freely choose
from a rich set of encoding schemes. Consequently, it is the
application that is responsible for parsing and interpreting the
keys and values. Another beneﬁt of the KV interface is its
portability. It is relatively easy to migrate from one key-value
system to another. However, while many use cases achieve op-
timal performance with this simple interface, we have noticed
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    41

===== PAGE 11 =====
that it can limit performance for some applications.
For example, building concurrency control outside of
RocksDB is possible but hard to make efﬁcient, especially if
two-phase-commit needs to be supported where some data
persistency is needed before committing the transaction. We
added transaction support for this reason, which is used by
MyRocks (MySQL+RocksDB). We continue to add features;
e.g., gap/next key locking and large transactions support.
In other cases, the limitation is caused by the key-value
interface itself. Accordingly, we have started to investigate
possible extensions to the basic key-value interface. One such
extension is support for user-deﬁned timestamps.
Versions and timestamps
Over the last few years, we have come to understand the im-
portance of data versioning. We have concluded that version
information should become a ﬁrst-class citizen in RocksDB,
in order to properly support features, such as multi-version
concurrency control (MVCC) and point-in-time reads. To
achieve this, RocksDB needs to be capable of accessing dif-
ferent versions efﬁciently.
So far, RocksDB has internally been using 56-bit sequence
numbers to identify different versions of KV-pairs. The se-
quence number is generated by RocksDB and incremented
on every client write (hence, all data is logically arranged
in sorted order). The client application cannot affect the se-
quence number. However RocksDB allows the application to
take a Snapshot of the DB, after which RocksDB guarantees
that all KV pairs that existed at the time of the snapshot will
persist until the snapshot is explicitly released by application.
As a result, multiple KV-pairs with the same key may co-exist,
differentiated by their sequence numbers.
This approach to versioning is inadequate as it does not
satisfy the requirements of many applications. To read from
a past state, a snapshot must have already been taken at the
previous point in time. RocksDB does not support taking
a snapshot of the past, since there is no API to specify a
time-point. Moreover, it is inefﬁcient to support point-in-time
reads. Finally, each RocksDB instance assigns its own se-
quence numbers and snapshots can be obtained only on a per
instance basis. This complicates versioning for applications
with multiple, (possibly replicated) shards, each of which is a
RocksDB instance. In summary, it is essentially impossible to
create versions of data that offer cross-shard consistent reads.
Applications can work around these limitations by encod-
ing timestamps within the key or within the value. However,
they will experience performance degradations in either case.
Encoding within the key sacriﬁces performance for point-
lookups, while encoding within the value sacriﬁces perfor-
mance for out-of-order writes to the same key and complicates
the reading of old versions of keys. We believe application-
speciﬁed timestamps would better address these limitations,
where the application can tag its data with timestamps that
can be understood globally, and do so outside the key or value.
We have added basic support for application-speciﬁed
workload throughput gain
ﬁll_seq + read_random 1.2
ﬁll_seq + read_while_writing 1.9
ﬁll_random + read_random 1.9
ﬁll_random +read_while_writing 2.0
Table 6: DB_bench microbenchmark using the timestamp
API sees≥ 1.2X throughput improvement.
timestamp and evaluated this approach with DB-Bench. The
results are shown in Table 6. Each workload has two steps:
the ﬁrst step populates the database, and we measure perfor-
mance during the second step. For example, in “fill_seq +
read_random”, we populate the initial database by writing
a number of keys in ascending order, and in step 2 perform
random read operations. Relative to the baseline, where the
application encodes a timestamp as part of the key (transpar-
ent to RocksDB), the application-speciﬁed timestamp API can
lead to a 1.2X or better throughput gain. The improvements
arise from treating the timestamp as metadata separate from
the user key, because then point lookups can be used instead
of iterators to get the newest value for a key, and Bloom ﬁlters
may identify SSTables not containing that key. Additionally,
the timestamp range covered by an SSTable can be stored in
its properties, which can be leveraged to exclude SSTables
that could only contain stale values.
We hope this feature will make it easier for users to imple-
ment multi-versioning in their systems for single node MVCC,
distributed transactions, or resolving conﬂicts in multi-master
replication. The more complicated API, however, is less
straightforward to use and perhaps prone to misuse. Further,
the database would consume more disk space than storing no
timestamp, and would be less portable to other systems.
7 Related Work
Our work on RocksDB has beneﬁted from a broad range of
research in a number of areas.
Storage Engine Libraries
Many storage engine have been built as a library to be embed-
ded in applications. RocksDB’s KV interface is more prim-
itive than, for example, BerkeleyDB [44], SQLite [47] and
Hekaton [18]. Further, RocksDB differs from these systems
by focusing on the performance of modern server workloads,
which require high throughput and low latency, and typically
run on high end SSDs and multicore CPUs. This differs from
systems with more general targets, or built for faster storage
media [18, 30].
Key-value stores for SSDs
Over the years, much effort has gone into optimizing key-
value stores, especially for SSDs. As early as 2011, SILT [34]
proposed a key-value store that balanced between memory
efﬁciency, CPU, and performance. ForestDB[45] uses HB+
42    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 12 =====
trees to index on top of logs. TokuDB [32] and other databases
use FractalTree/Bε trees. LOCS [67], NoFTL-KV [66] and
FlashKV [69] target Open-Channel SSDs for improved per-
formance. While RocksDB beneﬁted from these efforts, our
position and strategy for improving performance is different
and we continue to depend on LSM trees. Several studies have
compared the performance of RocksDB with other databases
such as InnoDB [41], TokuDB [19] [37], and WiredTiger [10].
LSM-tree improvements
Several systems also use LSM trees and improved their perfor-
mance. Write ampliﬁcations is often the primary optimization
goal; e.g., WiscKey [35], PebblesDB [52], IAM-tree [25] and
TRIAD [3]. These systems go further in optimizing for write
ampliﬁcation than RocksDB which focuses more on trade-
offs among different metrics. SlimDB [53] optimized LSM
trees for space efﬁciency; RocksDB also focuses on deleting
dead data. Monkey [17] attempts to balance between DRAM
and IOPs. bLSM [57], VT-tree [60] and cLSM [24] optimize
for the general performance of LSM trees.
Large-scale storage systems
There are numerous distributed storage systems [13, 14, 16,
26,38,64]. They usually have complex architectures spanning
multiple processes, hosts and data centers. They are not di-
rectly comparable to RocksDB, a storage engine library on
a single node. Other systems (e.g.,MongoDB, MySQL [42],
Microsoft SQL Server [38]) can use modular storage engines;
they have addressed similar challenges to what RocksDB
faces, including failure handling and using timestamps.
Failure handling. Checksums are frequently used to detect
data corruption [9, 23, 42]. Our argument that we need both
end-to-end and handoff checksums still mirrors the classic
end-to-end argument [55] and is similar to the strategy used
by others: [61], ZFS [71], Linux [48] and [70]. Our argument
for earlier corruption detection is similar to [33] which argues
that domain-speciﬁc checking is inadequate.
Timestamp support. Several storage systems provide times-
tamp support: HBase [26], WiredTiger [39] and BigTable [14];
Cassandra [13] supports a timestamp as an ordinary column.
In these systems, timestamps are a count of the number of mil-
liseconds since the UNIX epoch. Hekaton [18] uses a mono-
tonically increasing counter to assign timestamps, which is
similar to the RocksDB sequence number. RocksDB’s on-
going work on a user timestamp can be complementary to
the aforementioned efforts. We hope key-value APIs with a
user-deﬁned timestamp extension can make it easier for upper-
level systems to support features related to data versioning
with low overhead in both performance and efﬁciency.
8 Future Work and Open Questions
Besides completing the improvements mentioned above, in-
cluding optimizing for dis-aggregated storage, key-value sepa-
ration, multi-level checksums and application-speciﬁed times-
tamps, we plan to unify leveled and tiered compaction and
improve adaptivity. However, a number of open questions
could beneﬁt from further research.
1. How can we use SSD/HDD hybrid storage to improve
efﬁciency?
2. How can we mitigate the performance impact on readers
when there are many consecutive deletion markers?
3. How should we improve our write throttling algorithms?
4. Can we develop an efﬁcient way of comparing two repli-
cas to ensure they contain the same data?
5. How can we best exploit SCM? Should we still use LSM
tree and how to organize storage hierarchy?
6. Can there be a generic integrity API to handle data hand-
off between RocksDB and the ﬁle system layer?
9 Conclusions
RocksDB has grown from a key-value store serving niche ap-
plications to its current position of widespread adoption across
numerous industrial large-scale distributed applications. The
LSM tree as the main data structure has served RocksDB
well, as it exhibits good write and space ampliﬁcation. Our
view on performance has, however, evolved over time. While
write and space ampliﬁcation remain the primary concern,
additional focus has shifted to CPU and DRAM efﬁciency, as
well as remote storage.
Lessons from running large-scale applications taught us
that resource allocation needs to be managed across different
RocksDB instances, that the data format needs to remain back-
ward and forward compatible to allow incremental software
deployments, that appropriate support for database replica-
tion and backups are needed, and that conﬁguration manage-
ment needs to be straightforward and preferably automated.
Lessons from failure handling taught us that data corruption
errors need to be detected earlier and at every layer of the
system. The key-value interface enjoys great popularity for
its simplicity with some limitations in performance. Some
simple revisions to the interface might yield a better balance.
Acknowledgments
We attribute the success of RocksDB to all current and
past RocksDB team members at Facebook, all those who
made contributions in the open-source community, as well
as RocksDB users. We especially thank Mark Callaghan, the
mentor to the project for years, as well as Dhruba Borthakur,
the lead founding member of RocksDB. We also appreciate
comments to the paper by Jason Flinn and Mahesh Balakr-
ishnan. Finally, we thank our shepherd, Ethan Miller, and the
anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    43

===== PAGE 13 =====
A RocksDB Feature Timeline
   Performance  Configurability  Features 
2012 • Multi-threaded compactions    • Compaction filters • Locking SSTables from deletion 
2103 • Tiered compaction • Prefix Bloom filter • Bloom Filter for MemTables • Separate thread pool for MemTable flush  • Pluggable MemTable • Pluggable file format  • Merge Operator  
2014 • FIFO compaction • Compaction rate limiter • Cache-friendly Bloom filters   • String-based config options • Dynamic config changes  • Backup engine • Support for multiple key spaces ("column family") • Physical checkpoints 
2015 • Dynamic leveled compaction • File deletion rate limiting • Parallel Level 0 and 1 compaction  • Separate config file • Config compatibility checker   • Bulk loading for SSTable file integration • Optimistic and pessimistic transactions 
2016 • Different compression for last level • Parallel MemTable inserts   • MemTable total size caps across instances • Compaction migration tools   • DeleteRange()  
2017 • Separate thread pool for bottom-most compactions • Two-level file indices • Level 0 to level 0 compactions  • Single memory limit for both block cache and MemTable    
2018 • Dictionary compression • Hash index into data blocks    • Automatic recovery from out-of-space errors • Query trace and replay tools 
2019 • Batched MultiGet() with parallel I/O  • Configure plug-in function using object registry  • Secondary instance 
2020 • Multithreaded single file compression     • Entire file checksum • Automatically recover from retriable errors • Partial support for user-defined timestamps 
44    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 14 =====
B Recap of lessons learned
Some of the lessons we learned include:
1. It’s important that a storage engine can be tuned to ﬁt different performance characteristics. (§1)
2. Space efﬁciency is the bottleneck for most applications using SSDs. (§3, Space ampliﬁcation)
3. CPU overhead is becoming more important to allow systems to run more efﬁciently. (§3, CPU utilization)
4. Global, per host, resource management is necessary when many RocksDB instances run on the same host. (§4, Resource
management)
5. Having W AL treatment be conﬁgurable (synchronous W AL writes, buffered W AL writes or disabled W AL) offers applica-
tions performance advantages. (§4, W AL treatment)
6. The SSD TRIM operation is good for performance but ﬁle deletions need to be rate limited to prevent occasional performance
issues. (§4, Rate-limited ﬁle deletions)
7. RocksDB needs to provide both of backward and “forward” compatibility. (§4, Data format compatibility)
8. Automatic conﬁguration adaptivity is helpful in simplifying conﬁguration management. (§4, Managing conﬁgurations)
9. Data replication and backups need to be properly supported. (§4, Replication and backup support)
10. It is beneﬁcial to detect data corruptions earlier, rather than eventually. (§5)
11. CPU/memory corruption does happen, though very rarely, and sometimes cannot be handled by data replication. (§5)
12. Integrity protection must cover the entire system in order to prevent corrupted data (e.g., caused by bitﬂips in CPU/memory)
from being exposed to clients or other replicas; detecting corruption only when the data is at rest or being sent over the wire
is insufﬁcient. (§5)
13. Users often demand RocksDB to automatically recover from transient I/O errors, e.g. out-of-space or caused by network
problems. (§5)
14. Error handling needs to be treated in a differentiated manner, depending on their causes and consequences. (§5)
15. The key/value interface is versatile, but there are some performance limitation; adding a timestamp to key/value can offer a
good balance between performance and simplicity. (§6)
C Recap of design choices revisited
Some notable design choices revisited include:
1. Customizability is always good to users. (§4, Managing conﬁgurations)
2. RocksDB can be blind to CPU bit ﬂips. (§5)
3. It’s OK to panic when seeing any I/O error. (§5)
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    45

===== PAGE 15 =====
References
[1] Jung-Sang Ahn, Chiyoung Seo, Ravi Mayuram, Rahim
Yaseen, Jin-Soo Kim, and Seungryoul Maeng. ForestDB:
A fast key-value storage system for variable-length
string keys. IEEE Trans. on Computers, 65(3):902–915,
2015.
[2] Manos Athanassoulis, Michael S Kester, Lukas M Maas,
Radu Stoica, Stratos Idreos, Anastasia Ailamaki, and
Mark Callaghan. Designing access methods: The
RUM conjecture. In Proc. Intl. Conf on Extending
Database Technology (EDBT), volume 2016, pages 461–
466, 2016.
[3] Oana Balmau, Diego Didona, Rachid Guerraoui, Willy
Zwaenepoel, Huapeng Yuan, Aashray Arora, Karan
Gupta, and Pavan Konka. TRIAD: Creating synergies
between memory, disk and log in log-structured key-
value stores. In Proc. USENIX Annual Technical Con-
ference (USENIX-ATC’17), pages 363–375, 2017.
[4] Matias Bjørling. Zone Append: A new way of writing
to zoned storage. In Proc. Usenix Linux Storage and
Filesystems Conference (VAULT’20), 2020.
[5] Facebook Engineering Blog. LogDevice: A distributed
data store for logs. https://engineering.fb.com/c
ore-data/logdevice-a-distributed-data-stor
e-for-logs/. [Online; retrieved September 2020].
[6] Instagram Engineering Blog. Open-sourcing a 10x
reduction in Apache Cassandra tail latency. https:
//instagram-engineering.com/open-sourcing-
a-10x-reduction-in-apache-cassandra-tail-l
atency-d64f86b43589. [Online; retrieved September
2020].
[7] Netﬂix Technology Blog. Application data caching
using SSDs: The Moneta project: Next generation EV-
Cache for better cost optimization. https://netf
lixtechblog.com/application-data-caching
-\protect\discretionary{\char\hyphenchar\f
ont}{}{}using-ssds-5bf25df851ef . [Online; re-
trieved September 2020].
[8] Uber Engineering Blog. Cherami: Uber Engineering’s
durable and scalable task queue in Go. https://en
g.uber.com/cherami-message-queue-system/ .
[Online; retrieved September 2020].
[9] Dhruba Borthakur. HDFS architecture guide. Hadoop
Apache Project, 53(1-13):2, 2008.
[10] Mark Callaghan. MongoRocks and WiredTiger versus
LinkBench on a small server. http://smalldatum.b
logspot.com/2016/10/mongorocks-and-wiredti
ger-versus.html. [Online; retrieved Jan 2021].
[11] Zhichao Cao, Siying Dong, Sagar Vemuri, and
David H.C. Du. Characterizing, modeling, and bench-
marking RocksDB key-value workloads at Facebook. In
18th USENIX Conf. on File and Storage Technologies
(FAST’20), pages 209–223, February 2020.
[12] Paris Carbone, Asterios Katsifodimos, Stephan Ewen,
V olker Markl, Seif Haridi, and Kostas Tzoumas. Apache
Flink: Stream and batch processing in a single engine.
Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Com-
mittee on Data Engineering, 36(4), 2015.
[13] Apache Cassandra. https://cassandra.apache.o
rg/. [Online; retrieved September 2020].
[14] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C
Hsieh, Deborah A Wallach, Mike Burrows, Tushar Chan-
dra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert E Gruber. Bigtable: A
distributed storage system for structured data. ACM
Trans. on Computer Systems (TOCS), 26(2):1–26, 2008.
[15] Guoqiang Jerry Chen, Janet L Wiener, Shridhar Iyer, An-
shul Jaiswal, Ran Lei, Nikhil Simha, Wei Wang, Kevin
Wilfong, Tim Williamson, and Serhat Yilmaz. Realtime
data processing at Facebook. In Proc. Intl. Conf. on
Management of Data, pages 1087–1098, 2016.
[16] James C Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, An-
drew Fikes, Christopher Frost, Jeffrey John Furman,
Sanjay Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev, Christopher Heiser,
Peter Hochschild, et al. Spanner: Google’s globally dis-
tributed database. ACM Trans. on Computer Systems
(TOCS), 31(3):1–22, 2013.
[17] Niv Dayan, Manos Athanassoulis, and Stratos Idreos.
Monkey: Optimal navigable key-value store. In Proc.
Intl. Conf. on Management of Data (SIGMOD’17) ,
pages 79–94, 2017.
[18] Cristian Diaconu, Craig Freedman, Erik Ismert, Per-Ake
Larson, Pravin Mittal, Ryan Stonecipher, Nitin Verma,
and Mike Zwilling. Hekaton: SQL server’s memory-
optimized OLTP engine. In Proc. ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data (SIGMOD’13) , pages
1243–1254, 2013.
[19] Siying Dong, Mark Callaghan, Leonidas Galanis,
Dhruba Borthakur, Tony Savor, and Michael Stumm.
Optimizing space ampliﬁcation in RocksDB. In Proc.
Conf. on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR’17),
2017.
[20] Jose Faleiro. The dangers of logical replication and a
practical solution. In Proc. 18th Intl. Workshop on High
Performance Transaction Systems (HPTS’19), 2019.
46    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 16 =====
[21] Tasha Frankie, Gordon Hughes, and Ken Kreutz-
Delgado. A mathematical model of the trim command
in NAND-ﬂash SSDs. In Proc. 50th Annual Southeast
Regional Conference (ACM-SE’12), pages 59–64, 2012.
[22] S. Ghemawat and J. Dean. LevelDB. https://github
.com/google/leveldb, 2011.
[23] Sanjay Ghemawat, Howard Gobioff, and Shun-Tak Le-
ung. The Google File System. In Proc. 19th ACM Symp.
on Operating systems principles (SOSP’13), pages 29–
43, 2003.
[24] Guy Golan-Gueta, Edward Bortnikov, Eshcar Hillel, and
Idit Keidar. Scaling concurrent log-structured data
stores. In Proc. European Conf. on Computer Systems
(EUROSYS’15), pages 1–14, 2015.
[25] Caixin Gong, Shuibing He, Yili Gong, and Yingchun Lei.
On integration of appends and merges in log-structured
merge trees. In Proc. 48th Intl. Conf. on Parallel Pro-
cessing (ICPP’19), pages 1–10, 2019.
[26] Apache HBase. https://hbase.apache.org/. [On-
line; retrieved September 2020].
[27] Dongxu Huang, Qi Liu, Qiu Cui, Zhuhe Fang, Xiaoyu
Ma, Fei Xu, Li Shen, Liu Tang, Yuxing Zhou, Meng-
long Huang, Wan Wei, Cong Liu, Jian Zhang, Jianjun
Li, Xuelian Wu, Lingyu Song, Ruoxi Sun, Shuaipeng
Yu, Lei Zhao, Nicholas Cameron, Liquan Pei, and Xin
Tang. TiDB: A Raft-based HTAP database.Proc. VLDB
Endow., 13(12):3072–3084, August 2020.
[28] Intel. Trim overview. https://www.intel.com/co
ntent/www/us/en/support/articles/000016148
/memory-and-storage.html . [Online; retrieved Jan
2021].
[29] Iron.io. Conﬂuent https://www.iron.io . [Online;
retrieved September 2020].
[30] Hideaki Kimura. FOEDUS: OLTP engine for a thousand
cores and NVRAM. In Proc. SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on
Management of Data (SIGMOD’15), pages 691–706,
2015.
[31] Jay Kreps. Introducing Kafka Streams: Stream process-
ing made simple. Conﬂuent https://www.conflu
ent.io/blog/introducing-kafka-streams-stre
am-processing-made-simple/ . [Online; retrieved
September 2020].
[32] B Kuszmaul. How TokuDB fractal tree indexes work.
Technical report, Technical report, TokuTek, 2010.
[33] Chuck Lever. End-to-end data integrity requirements for
NFS. Oracle Corp. https://datatracker.ietf.o
rg/meeting/83/materials/slides-83-nfsv4-2 .
[Online; retrieved September 2020].
[34] Hyeontaek Lim, Bin Fan, David G Andersen, and
Michael Kaminsky. SILT: A memory-efﬁcient, high-
performance key-value store. In Proc. 23rd ACM Symp.
on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP’11), pages 1–
13, 2011.
[35] Lanyue Lu, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Har-
iharan Gopalakrishnan, Andrea C Arpaci-Dusseau, and
Remzi H Arpaci-Dusseau. Wisckey: Separating keys
from values in SSD-conscious storage. ACM Trans. on
Storage (TOS), 13(1):1–28, 2017.
[36] Yoshinori Matsunobu. Migrating a database from Inn-
oDB to MyRock. Facebook Engineering Blog https:
//engineering.fb.com/core-data/migrating
-a-database-from-innodb-to-myrocks/ , 2017.
[Online; retrieved September 2020].
[37] Yoshinori Matsunobu, Siying Dong, and Herman Lee.
MyRocks: LSM-tree database storage engine serving
Facebook’s Social Graph. Proc. VLDB Endowment ,
13(12):3217–3230, August 2020.
[38] Microsoft. Microsoft SQL Server. https://www.micr
osoft.com/en-us/sql-server/ . [Online; retrieved
September 2020].
[39] MongoDB. WiredTiger Storage Engine. https://
docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/wiredtiger/ .
[Online; retrieved September 2020].
[40] MongoRocks. RocksDB storage engine module for
MongoDB. https://github.com/mongodb-par
tners/mongo-rocks . [Online; retrieved September
2020].
[41] MySQL. Introduction to InnodeDB. https://dev.my
sql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/innodb-introduct
ion.html. [Online; retrieved September 2020].
[42] MySQL. MySQL. https://www.mysql.com/ . [On-
line; retrieved September 2020].
[43] Shadi A Noghabi, Kartik Paramasivam, Yi Pan, Navina
Ramesh, Jon Bringhurst, Indranil Gupta, and Roy H
Campbell. Samza: Stateful scalable stream processing at
LinkedIn. Proc. of the VLDB Endowment, 10(12):1634–
1645, 2017.
[44] Michael A Olson, Keith Bostic, and Margo I Seltzer.
Berkeley DB. In USENIX Annual Technical Conference,
FREENIX Track, pages 183–191, 1999.
[45] Patrick O’Neil, Edward Cheng, Dieter Gawlick, and Eliz-
abeth O’Neil. The log-structured merge-tree (LSM-tree).
Acta Informatica, 33(4):351–385, 1996.
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    47

===== PAGE 17 =====
[46] Keren Ouaknine, Oran Agra, and Zvika Guz. Optimiza-
tion of RocksDB for Redis on ﬂash. In Proc. Intl. Conf.
on Compute and Data Analysis, pages 155–161, 2017.
[47] Mike Owens. The deﬁnitive guide to SQLite. Apress,
2006.
[48] Martin K Petersen. Linux data integrity extensions. In
Linux Symposium, volume 4, page 5, 2008.
[49] Martin K. Petersen and Sergio Leunissen. Eliminating
silent data corruption with Oracle Linux. Oracle Corp.
https://oss.oracle.com/~mkp/docs/data-inte
grity-webcast.pdf . [Online; retrieved September
2020].
[50] Ivan Luiz Picoli, Niclas Hedam, Philippe Bonnet, and
Pinar Tözün. Open-channel SSD (What is it good for).
In Proc. Conf. on Innovative Data Systems Research
(CIDR’20), 2020.
[51] Qihoo. Conﬂuent https://github.com/Qihoo360/
pika. [Online; retrieved September 2020].
[52] Pandian Raju, Rohan Kadekodi, Vijay Chidambaram,
and Ittai Abraham. PebblesDB: Building key-value
stores using fragmented log-structured merge trees. In
Proc. 26th Symp. on Operating Systems Principles
(SOSP’17), pages 497–514, 2017.
[53] Kai Ren, Qing Zheng, Joy Arulraj, and Garth Gibson.
SlimDB: A space-efﬁcient key-value storage engine
for semi-sorted data. Proc. of the VLDB Endowment
(VLDB’17), 10(13):2037–2048, 2017.
[54] RocksDB.org. A persistent key-value store for fast stor-
age environments. https://rocksdb.org . [Online;
retrieved September 2020].
[55] Jerome H Saltzer, David P Reed, and David D Clark.
End-to-end arguments in system design. ACM Trans. on
Computer Systems (TOCS), 2(4):277–288, 1984.
[56] Tony Savor, Mitchell Douglas, Michael Gentili, Laurie
Williams, Kent Beck, and Michael Stumm. Continu-
ous deployment at Facebook and OANDA. In 2016
IEEE/ACM 38th International Conference on Software
Engineering Companion (ICSE-C), pages 21–30. IEEE,
2016.
[57] Russell Sears and Raghu Ramakrishnan. bLSM: a gen-
eral purpose log-structured merge tree. In Proc. Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data (SIGMOD’12) , pages
217–228, 2012.
[58] Arun Sharma. How we use RocksDB at Rockset. Rock-
set Blog https://rockset.com/blog/how-we-use-
rocksdb-at-rockset/. [Online; retrieved September
2020].
[59] Arun Sharma. LogDevice: A distributed data store for
logs. Facebook Engineering Blog https://engine
ering.fb.com/data-infrastructure/dragon-
a-distributed-graph-query-engine/ . [Online;
retrieved September 2020].
[60] Pradeep J Shetty, Richard P Spillane, Ravikant R Mal-
pani, Binesh Andrews, Justin Seyster, and Erez Zadok.
Building workload-independent storage with VT-trees.
In Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. on File and Storage Tech-
nologies (FAST’13), pages 17–30, 2013.
[61] Gopalan Sivathanu, Charles P Wright, and Erez Zadok.
Enhancing ﬁle system integrity through checksums.
Technical report, Citeseer, 2004.
[62] Mark Slee, Aditya Agarwal, and Marc Kwiatkowski.
Thrift: Scalable cross-language services implementation.
Facebook White Paper, 5(8), 2007.
[63] Google Open Source. Protobuf. https://opensour
ce.google/projects/protobuf . [Online; retrieved
September 2020].
[64] Rebecca Taft, Irfan Sharif, Andrei Matei, Nathan Van-
Benschoten, Jordan Lewis, Tobias Grieger, Kai Niemi,
Andy Woods, Anne Birzin, Raphael Poss, Paul Bardea,
Amruta Ranade, Ben Darnell, Bram Gruneir, Justin Jaf-
fray, Lucy Zhang, and Peter Mattis. CockroachDB: The
resilient geo-distributed SQL database. In Proc. ACM
SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data (SIG-
MOD’20), page 1493–1509, 2020.
[65] Amy Tai, Andrew Kryczka, Shobhit O. Kanaujia,
Kyle Jamieson, Michael J. Freedman, and Asaf Cidon.
Who’s afraid of uncorrectable bit errors? Online re-
covery of ﬂash errors with distributed redundancy. In
2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC’19), pages 977–992, Renton, W A, July 2019.
[66] Tobias Vinçon, Sergej Hardock, Christian Riegger, Ju-
lian Oppermann, Andreas Koch, and Ilia Petrov. NoFTL-
KV: Tackling write-ampliﬁcation on KV-stores with
native storage management. In Proc. 21st Intl. Conf.
on Extending Database Technology (EDBT’18), pages
457–460, 2018.
[67] Peng Wang, Guangyu Sun, Song Jiang, Jian Ouyang,
Shiding Lin, Chen Zhang, and Jason Cong. An efﬁcient
design and implementation of LSM-tree based key-value
store on open-channel SSD. In Proc. 9th European Conf.
on Computer Systems (EUROSYS’14, pages 1–14, 2014.
[68] Fei Yang, K Dou, S Chen, JU Kang, and S Cho. Multi-
streaming RocksDB. In Proc. Non-Volatile Memories
Workshop, 2015.
48    19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies USENIX Association

===== PAGE 18 =====
[69] Jiacheng Zhang, Youyou Lu, Jiwu Shu, and Xiongjun
Qin. FlashKV: Accelerating KV performance with open-
channel SSDs. ACM Trans on Embedded Computing
Systems (TECS), 16(5s):1–19, 2017.
[70] Yupu Zhang, Daniel S Myers, Andrea C Arpaci-
Dusseau, and Remzi H Arpaci-Dusseau. Zettabyte reli-
ability with ﬂexible end-to-end data integrity. In Proc.
29th IEEE Symp. on Mass Storage Systems and Tech-
nologies (MSST’13), pages 1–14, 2013.
[71] Yupu Zhang, Abhishek Rajimwale, Andrea C Arpaci-
Dusseau, and Remzi H Arpaci-Dusseau. End-to-end
data integrity for ﬁle systems: A ZFS case study. InProc.
8th USENIX Conf. on File and Storage Technologies
(FAST’10), pages 29–42, 2010.
USENIX Association 19th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies    49