

===== PAGE 1 =====
FoundationDB Record Layer:
A Multi-Tenant Structured Datastore
Christos Chrysafis, Ben Collins, Scott Dugas, Jay Dunkelberger, Moussa Ehsan,
Scott Gray, Alec Grieser, Ori Herrnstadt, Kfir Lev-Ari, Tao Lin, Mike McMahon,
Nicholas Schiefer, Alexander Shraer
Apple, Inc.
ABSTRACT
The FoundationDB Record Layer is an open source library
that provides a record-oriented data store with semantics
similar to a relational database implemented on top of Foun-
dationDB, an ordered, transactional key-value store. The
Record Layer provides a lightweight, highly extensible way
to store structured data. It offers schema management and a
rich set of query and indexing facilities, some of which are
not usually found in traditional relational databases, such
as nested record types, indexes on commit versions, and in-
dexes that span multiple record types. The Record Layer is
stateless and built for massive multi-tenancy, encapsulating
and isolating all of a tenant’s state, including indexes, into a
separate logical database. We demonstrate how the Record
Layer is used by CloudKit, Apple’s cloud backend service, to
provide powerful abstractions to applications serving hun-
dreds of millions of users. CloudKit uses the Record Layer
to host billions of independent databases, many with a com-
mon schema. Features provided by the Record Layer enable
CloudKit to provide richer APIs and stronger semantics with
reduced maintenance overhead and improved scalability.
ACM Reference Format:
Christos Chrysafis, Ben Collins, Scott Dugas, Jay Dunkelberger,
Moussa Ehsan, Scott Gray, Alec Grieser, Ori Herrnstadt, Kfir Lev-
Ari, Tao Lin, Mike McMahon, Nicholas Schiefer, and Alexander Shraer.
2019. FoundationDB Record Layer: A Multi-Tenant Structured Data-
store. In 2019 International Conference on Management of Data (SIG-
MOD ’19), June 30-July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3299869.3314039
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGMOD ’19, June 30-July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5643-5/19/06.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3299869.3314039
1 INTRODUCTION
Many applications require a scalable and highly available
backend that provides durable storage. Developing and op-
erating such backends presents many challenges. First, the
high volume of data collected by modern applications, cou-
pled with the large number of users and high access rates,
requires smart partitioning and placement solutions for stor-
ing data to achieve horizontal scalability. Modern storage
systems must scale elastically in response to increases in
user demand for both storage capacity and computation. Sec-
ond, as systems become larger, formerly “rare” events such
as network, disk, and machine failures become everyday
occurrences. A core challenge of distributed systems is main-
taining system availability and durability in the face of these
problems. Third, many techniques for addressing scalabil-
ity and availability challenges, such as eventual consistency,
create immense challenges for application developers. Im-
plementing transactions in a distributed setting remains one
of the most challenging problems in distributed systems.
Fourth, as stateful services grow, they must support the
needs of many diverse users and applications. This multi-
tenancy brings many challenges, including isolation, resource
sharing, and elasticity in the face of growing load. Many data-
base systems intermingle data from different tenants at both
the compute and storage levels. Retrofitting resource iso-
lation to such systems is challenging. Stateful services are
especially difficult to scale elastically because state cannot
be partitioned arbitrarily. For example, data and indexes can-
not be stored on entirely separate storage clusters without
sacrificing transactional updates, performance, or both.
These problems must be addressed by any company of-
fering stateful services. Yet despite decades of academic and
industrial research, they are notoriously difficult to solve
correctly and require a high level of expertise and experi-
ence. Big companies use in-house solutions, developed and
evolved over many years by large teams of experts. Smaller
companies often have little choice but to pay larger cloud
providers or sacrifice durability.
FoundationDB [10] democratizes industrial-grade highly-
available and consistent storage, making it freely available to
anyone as an open source solution [
11] and is currently used
in production at companies such as Apple, Snowflake, and
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1787

===== PAGE 2 =====
Wavefront. While the semantics, performance, and reliability
of FoundationDB make it extremely useful, FoundationDB’s
data model, an ordered mapping from binary keys to binary
values, is often insufficient for applications. Many of them
need structured data storage, indexing capabilities, a query
language, and more. Without these, application developers
are forced to reimplement common functionality, slowing
development and introducing bugs.
To address these challenges, we present the FoundationDB
Record Layer: an open source record-oriented data store built
on top of FoundationDB with semantics similar to a relational
database [19, 20]. The Record Layer provides schema manage-
ment, a rich set of query and indexing facilities, and a variety
of features that leverage FoundationDB’s advanced capa-
bilities. It inherits FoundationDB’s strong ACID semantics,
reliability, and performance in a distributed setting. These
lightweight abstractions allow for multi-tenancy at an ex-
tremely large scale: the Record Layer allows creating isolated
logical databases for each tenant—at Apple, it is used to man-
age billions of such databases—all while providing familiar
features such as transactional index maintenance.
The Record Layer represents structured values as Protocol
Buffer [4] messages called records that include typed fields
and even nested records. Since an application’s schema in-
evitably changes over time, the Record Layer includes tools
for schema management and evolution. It also includes facili-
ties for planning and efficiently executing declarative queries
using a variety of index types. The Record Layer leverages ad-
vanced features of FoundationDB; for example, many aggre-
gate indexes are maintained using FoundationDB’s atomic
mutations, allowing concurrent, conflict-free updates. Be-
yond its rich feature set, the Record Layer provides a large
set of extension points, allowing its clients to extend its
functionality even further. For example, client-defined index
types can be seamlessly “plugged in” to the index maintainer
and query planner. Similarly, record serialization supports
client-defined encryption and compression algorithms.
The Record Layer supports multi-tenancy at scale through
two key architectural choices. First, the layer is completely
stateless, so scaling the compute service is as easy as launch-
ing more stateless instances. A stateless design means that
load-balancers and routers need only consider where the
data are located rather than which compute servers can serve
them. Furthermore, a stateless server has fewer resources
that need to be apportioned among isolated clients. Second,
the layer achieves resource sharing and elasticity with its
record store abstraction, which encapsulates the state of an
entire logical database, including serialized records, indexes,
and even operational state. Each record store is assigned
a contiguous range of keys, ensuring that data belonging
to different tenants is logically isolated. If needed, moving
a tenant is as simple as copying the appropriate range of
data to another cluster as everything needed to interpret and
operate each record store is found in its key range.
The Record Layer is used by multiple systems at Apple.
We demonstrate the power of the Record Layer at scale by de-
scribing how CloudKit, Apple’s cloud backend service, uses
it to provide strongly-consistent data storage for a large and
diverse set of applications [43]. Using the Record Layer’s ab-
stractions, CloudKit offers multi-tenancy at the extreme by
maintaining independent record stores for each user of each
application. As a result, we use the Record Layer on Foun-
dationDB to host billions of independent databases sharing
thousands of schemata. In the future, we envision that the
Record Layer will be combined with other storage models,
such as queues and graphs, leveraging FoundationDB as a
general purpose storage engine to provide transactional con-
sistency across all these data models. In summary, this work
makes the following contributions:
• An open source layer on top of FoundationDB with se-
mantics akin to those of a relational database.
• The record store abstraction and a suite of techniques
to manipulate it, enabling billions of logical tenants to
operate independent databases in a FoundationDB cluster.
• An extensible architecture allowing clients to customize
core features including schema management and indexing.
• A lightweight design that provides rich features on top of
the underlying key-value store.
2 BACKGROUND ON FOUNDATIONDB
FoundationDB is a distributed, ordered key-value store that
runs on clusters of commodity servers and provides ACID
transactions over arbitrary sets of keys using optimistic con-
currency control. Its architecture draws from the virtual
synchrony paradigm [23, 26] whereby FoundationDB is com-
posed of two logical clusters: one that stores data and pro-
cesses transactions and another coordination cluster (run-
ning Active Disk Paxos [27]) that maintains membership and
configuration for the first cluster. This allows FoundationDB
to achieve high availability while requiring onlyF +1 storage
replicas to tolerate F failures [23]. FoundationDB is distin-
guished by its deterministic simulation testing framework
which can quickly simulate entire clusters under a variety
of failure conditions in a single thread with complete deter-
minism. In the past year, we have run more than 250 million
simulations equivalent to more than 1870 years and 3.5 mil-
lion CPU-hours. This rigorous testing in simulation makes
FoundationDB extremely stable and allows its developers
to introduce new features and releases in a rapid cadence,
unusual among similar strongly-consistent distributed—or
even centralized—databases.
Layers. Unlike most databases, which bundle together a
storage engine, data model, and query language, forcing
users to choose all three or none, FoundationDB takes a
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1788

===== PAGE 3 =====
modular approach: it provides a highly scalable, transac-
tional storage engine with a minimal yet carefully chosen
set of features. For example, it provides no structured se-
mantics, and each cluster provides a single, logical keyspace
which it automatically partitions and replicates. Layers can
be constructed on top to provide various data models and
other capabilities. Currently, the Record Layer is the most
substantial layer built on FoundationDB.
Transactions and Semantics. FoundationDB provides ACID
multi-key transactions with strictly-serializable isolation, im-
plemented using multi-version concurrency control (MVCC)
for reads and optimistic concurrency for writes. As a result,
neither reads nor writes are blocked by other readers or writ-
ers. Instead, conflicting transactions fail at commit time and
are usually retried by the client. Specifically, a client perform-
ing a transaction obtains a read version, chosen as the latest
database commit version, by performing a getReadVersion
(GRV) call and performs reads at that version, effectively
observing an instantaneous snapshot of the database. Trans-
actions that contain writes can be committed only if none of
the values they read have been modified by another transac-
tion since the transaction’s read version. Committed transac-
tions are written to disk on multiple cluster nodes and then
acknowledged to the client. FoundationDB executes opera-
tions within a transaction in parallel, while preserving the
program order of accesses to each key and guaranteeing that
a read following a write to the same key within a transaction
returns the written value. FoundationDB imposes a 5 second
transaction time limit, which the Record Layer compensates
for using techniques described in Section 4.
Besides create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) opera-
tions, FoundationDB provides atomic read-modify-write op-
erations on single keys (e.g., addition, min/max, etc.). Atomic
operations occur within a transaction like other operations,
but they do not create read conflicts, so a concurrent change
to that value would not cause the transaction to abort. For ex-
ample, a counter incremented concurrently by many clients
would be best implemented using atomic addition.
FoundationDB allows clients to customize the default con-
currency control behavior by trading off isolation semantics
to reduce transaction conflicts. Snapshot reads do not cause
an abort even if the read key was overwritten by a later trans-
action. For example, a transaction may wish to read a value
that is monotonically increasing over time just to determine
if the value has reached some threshold. In this case, reading
the value at a snapshot isolation level (or clearing the read
conflict range for the value’s key) would allow the transac-
tion to see the state of the value, but it would not result in
conflicts with other transactions that may be modifying the
value concurrently.
Keys, values, and order. Keys and values in FoundationDB
are opaque binary values. FoundationDB imposes limits on
key and value sizes (10kB for keys and 100kB for values)
with much smaller recommended sizes (32B for keys and
up to 10KB for values). Transactions are limited to 10MB,
including the key and value size of all keys written and the
sizes of all keys in the read and write conflict ranges of the
commit. In production at Apple, with workloads generated
by CloudKit through the Record Layer, the median and 99th
percentile transaction sizes are approximately 7KB and 36KB,
respectively. Keys are part of a single global keyspace, and
it is up to applications to divide and manage that keyspace
with the help of several convenience APIs such as the tuple
and directory layers described next. FoundationDB supports
range reads based on the binary ordering of keys. Finally,
range clear operations are supported and can be used to clear
all keys in a certain range or starting with a certain prefix.
Tuple and directory layers. Key ordering in FoundationDB
makes tuples a convenient and simple way to model data. The
tuple layer, included within the FoundationDB client library,
encodes tuples into keys such that the binary ordering of
those keys preserves the ordering of tuples and the natural
ordering of typed tuple elements. In particular, a common
prefix of the tuple is serialized as a common byte prefix
and defines a key subspace. For example, a client may store
the tuple (state,city) and later read using a prefix like
(state,*).
The directory layer provides an API for defining a log-
ical directory structure which maps potentially long-but-
meaningful binary strings to short binary strings, reducing
the amount of space used by keys. For example, if all of an ap-
plication’s keys are prefixed with its name, the prefix might
be added to the directory layer. Internally, the directory layer
assigns values to its entries using a sliding window alloca-
tion algorithm that concurrently allocates unique mappings
while keeping the allocated integers small.
3 DESIGN GOALS AND PRINCIPLES
The Record Layer is designed to provide powerful abstrac-
tions for operations on structured data including transaction
processing, schema management, and query execution. It
aims to provide this rich set of features in a massively multi-
tenant environment where it must serve the needs of a great
number of tenants with diverse storage and retrieval needs.
For example, some tenants store and locally synchronize a
small amount of data while others store large amounts of
data and query it in complex ways.
To illustrate this challenge concretely, Figure 3 shows the
distribution of the sizes of record stores used to store Cloud-
Kit’s private databases [43]. Although the vast majority of
databases are quite small, much of the data is stored in rela-
tively large databases. Furthermore, the data in the figure ex-
cludes larger databases such as the “public” databases shared
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1789

===== PAGE 4 =====
across all users of an application, which can be terabytes in
size.
In the face of such a range of database sizes, it is tempting
to provision and operate separate systems to store “small
data” and “big data. ” However, such an approach poses both
operational challenges and difficulties to application devel-
opers, who must contend with varying semantics across
systems. Instead, the Record Layer offers the semantics of a
structured data store with massive multi-tenancy in mind by
providing features that serve the diverse needs of its tenants
and mechanisms to isolate them from each other.
3.1 Design principles
Achieving these goals required a variety of careful design
decisions, some of which differ from traditional relational
databases. This section highlights several of these principles.
Statelessness. In many distributed databases, individual
database servers maintain ephemeral, server-specific state,
such as memory and disk buffers, in addition to persistent
information such as data and indexes. In contrast, the Record
Layer stores all of its state in FoundationDB or returns it
to the client so that the layer itself is completely stateless.
10□6
10□4
10□2
1
fraction of record stores
1 102 104 106 108 1010
size of record store (bytes)
10□6
10□4
10□2
1
fraction of bytes stored
Figure 1: Top: The distribution of record store sizes
for a 0.1% sample of CloudKit-managed record stores
as a normalized histogram (blue) and cumulative den-
sity function (orange). Notice that a substantial ma-
jority of record stores contain fewer than 1 kilobytes
of record data. Bottom: The distribution of the total
size of record stores of a particular size as a normal-
ized histogram (blue) and cumulative density func-
tion (orange). The sample represents private databases
and excludes many large record stores such as public
databases. All sizes include primary record data and
exclude metadata and index entries.
For example, the Record Layer does not maintain any state
about the position of a cursor in memory; instead, the context
needed to advance a cursor in a future request is serialized
and returned to the client as a continuation.
The stateless nature of the layer has three primary benefits,
which we illustrate with the same example of streaming data
from a cursor. First, it simplifies request routing: a request
can be routed to any of the stateless servers even if it requests
more results from an existing cursor since there is no buffer
on a particular server that needs to be accessed. Second, it
substantially simplifies the operation of the system at scale:
if the server encounters a problem, it can be safely restarted
without needing to transfer cursor state to another server.
Lastly, storing state in FoundationDB ensures that all state
has the same ACID semantics as the underlying key-value
store: we do not need separate facilities for verifying the
integrity of our cursor-specific metadata.
Streaming model for queries. The Record Layer controls its
resource consumption by limiting its semantics to those that
can be implemented on streams of records. For example, it
supports ordered queries (as in SQL’s ORDER BY clause) only
when there is an available index supporting the requested
sort order. This approach enables supporting concurrent
workloads without requiring stateful memory pools in the
server. This also reflects the layer’s general design philoso-
phy of preferring fast and predictable transaction processing
over OLAP-style analytical queries.
Flexible schema. The atomic unit of data in the Record
Layer is a record: a Protocol Buffer [ 4] message which is
serialized and stored in the underlying key-value space. This
provides fast and efficient transaction processing on individ-
ual records akin to a row-oriented relational database. Unlike
record tuples in the traditional relational model, these mes-
sages can be highly structured; in addition to a variety of
complex data types, these messages support nesting of record
types within a field and repeated instances of the same field.
As a result, list and map data structures can be implemented
within a single record. Because the Record Layer is designed
to support millions of independent databases with a common
schema, it stores metadata separately from the underlying
data so that the common metadata can be updated atomically
for all stores that use it.
Efficiency. Implemented as a library rather than an inde-
pendent client/server system, the Record Layer can be em-
bedded in its client, imposing few requirements on how the
actual server is implemented. Since FoundationDB is most
performant at high levels of concurrency, nearly all of the
Record Layer’s operations are implemented asynchronously
and pipelined where possible. We also make extensive use of
FoundationDB-specific features, such as controllable isola-
tion semantics, both within the layer’s implementation and
exposed to clients via its API.
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1790

===== PAGE 5 =====
indexes
Application
Record Layer API
Record Store
record
record
record
record
Metadata
indexes
Record Store
record
record
record
record
Metadata
Application
Record Layer API
Metadata Store 
(Schema)
Figure 2: Architecture of the Record Layer. The core
record store abstraction stores an entire logical data-
base with a contiguous FoundationDB subspace, pro-
viding logical isolation between tenants.
Extensibility. In the spirit of the FoundationDB’s layered
architecture, the Record Layer exposes a number of exten-
sion points through its API so that clients can extend its
functionality. For example, clients can easily define new in-
dex types, methods for maintaining those indexes, and rules
that extend its query planner to use those indexes in plan-
ning. This extensibility makes it easy to add features that
are left out of the Record Layer’s core, such as memory pool
management and arbitrary sorting. Our implementation of
CloudKit on top of the Record Layer (discussed in Section 8)
makes substantial use of this extensibility with custom index
types, planner behavior, and schema management.
4 RECORD LAYER OVERVIEW
The Record Layer is primarily used as a library by stateless
backend servers that need to store structured data in Foun-
dationDB. It is used to store billions of logical databases,
called record stores, with thousands of schemata. Records in a
record store are Protocol Buffer messages and a record type
is defined with a Protocol Buffer definition. A record type
resembles a table in a traditional relational database in that
it defines the structure of multiple records of that type. How-
ever, unlike tables in a relational database, all record types
within a record store are interleaved within the same extent.
The schema, also called the metadata, of a record store is
a set of record types and index definitions on these types
(see Section 6). Metadata is versioned and may be stored
in FoundationDB or elsewhere (metadata management and
evolution is discussed in Section 5). The record store is re-
sponsible for storing raw records, indexes defined on the
record fields, and the highest version of the metadata it was
accessed with. This general architecture is shown in Figure 2.
Providing isolation between record stores is key for multi-
tenancy. To facilitate resource isolation, the Record Layer
tracks and enforces limits on resource consumption for each
transaction, provides continuations to resume work, and
can be coupled with external throttling. On the data level,
the keys of each record store start with a unique binary
prefix which defines a FoundationDB subspace. All the record
store’s data is logically co-located within the subspace and
the subspaces of different record stores do not overlap.
Primary keys and indexes are defined within the Record
Layer using key expressions, covered in detail in Appendix A.
A key expression defines a logical path through a record;
applying it to a record extracts record field values and pro-
duces a tuple that becomes the primary key for the record
or key of the index for which the expression is defined. Key
expressions may produce multiple tuples, allowing indexes
to “fan out” and generate index entries for individual ele-
ments of nested and repeated fields. Since all record types
are interleaved, both queries and index definitions may span
all types of records in a record store.
To avoid exposing FoundationDB’s limits on key and value
sizes to clients, the Record Layer splits large records across a
set of contiguous keys and splices them back together when
deserializing split records. A special type of split, immedi-
ately preceding each record, holds the commit version of the
record’s last modification; it is returned with the record on ev-
ery read. The Record Layer supports pluggable serialization
libraries, including optional compression and encryption of
stored records.
The Record Layer provides APIs for storing, reading and
deleting records, creating and deleting record stores and in-
dexes in stores, scanning and querying records using the
secondary indexes, updating record store metadata, manag-
ing a client application’s directory structure, and iteratively
rebuilding indexes when they cannot be rebuilt as part of a
single transaction.
All Record Layer operations that provide a cursor over a
stream of data, such as record scans, index scans, and queries,
support continuations. A continuation is an opaque binary
value that represents the starting position of the next avail-
able value in a cursor stream. Results are parceled to clients
along with the continuation, allowing them resume the oper-
ation by supplying the returned continuation when invoking
the operation again. This gives clients a way to control the it-
eration without requiring the server to maintain state, and it
allows scan or query operations that exceed the transaction
time limit to be split across multiple transactions.
The Record Layer leverages details of FoundationDB’s
implementation to improve data access speed. For example,
record prefetching asynchronously preloads records into the
FoundationDB client’s read-your-write cache, but does not
return them to the client application. When reading batches
of many records, this can potentially save a context switch
and record deserialization. The Record Layer also includes
mechanisms to trade off consistency for performance, such as
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1791

===== PAGE 6 =====
snapshot reads. Similarly, the layer exposes FoundationDB’s
“causal-read-risky” flag, which causes getReadVersion to
be faster at the risk of returning a slightly stale read ver-
sion during the rare case of a cluster reconfiguration. This is
usually an acceptable risk; for example, ZooKeeper’s “sync”
operation behaves similarly [38]. Furthermore, transactions
that modify state never return stale data since their reads are
validated at commit time. Read version caching optimizes
getReadVersion further by completely avoiding communi-
cation with FoundationDB if a read version was “recently”
fetched from FoundationDB. Often, the client application
provides an acceptable staleness and the last seen commit
version as transaction parameters; the Record Layer uses
a cached version as long as it is sufficiently recent and no
smaller than the version previously observed by the client.
This may result in reading stale data and may increase the
rate of failed transactions in transactions that modify state.
Version caching is most useful for read-only transactions that
do not need to return the latest data and for low-concurrency
workloads where the abort rate is low.
To help clients organize their record stores in Founda-
tionDB’s key space, the Record Layer provides a KeySpace
API which exposes the key space in a fashion similar to a
filesystem directory structure. When writing data to Foun-
dationDB, or when defining the location of a record store, a
path through this logical directory tree may be traced and
compiled into a tuple value that becomes a row key. The
KeySpace API ensures that all directories within the tree
are logically isolated and non-overlapping. Where appro-
priate, it uses the directory layer (described in Section 2) to
automatically convert directory names to small integers.
5 METADATA MANAGEMENT
The Record Layer provides facilities for managing changes to
a record store’s metadata. Since one of its goals is to support
many databases that share a common schema, the Record
Layer allows metadata to be stored in a separate keyspace
from the data or even a separate storage system entirely. In
most deployments, this metadata is aggressively cached by
clients so that records can be interpreted without additional
reads from the key-value store. This architecture allows low-
overhead, per request, connections to a particular database.
Schema evolution. Since records are serialized into the
underlying key-value store as Protocol Buffer messages (pos-
sibly after pre-processing steps, such as compression and
encryption), some basic data evolution properties are in-
herited from Protocol Buffers: new fields can be added to a
record type and appear as uninitialized in old records, and
new record types can be added without interfering with old
records. As a best practice, field numbers are never reused
and should be deprecated rather than removed altogether.
The metadata is versioned in single-stream, non-branching,
monotonically increasing fashion. Every record store tracks
the highest version it has been accessed with in a small
header within a single key-value pair. When a record store
is opened, this header is read and the version compared with
current metadata version.
Typically, the metadata will not have changed since the
store was last opened, so these versions are the same. When
the version in the database is newer, a client has usually used
an out-of-date cache to obtain the current metadata. If the
version in the database is older, changes need to be applied.
New records types and fields can be added by updating the
Protocol Buffer definition.
Adding indexes. An index on a new record type can be en-
abled immediately since there are no existing records of that
type. Adding an index to an existing record type, which might
already have records in the record store, is more expensive
since it might require reindexing. Since records of different
types may exist in the same key space, all the records need
to be scanned when building a new index. If there are very
few or no records, the index can be built right away within
a single transaction. If there are many existing records, the
index cannot be built immediately because that might ex-
ceed the 5 second transaction time limit. Instead, the index
is disabled and the reindexing proceeds as a background job
as described in Section 6.
Metadata versioning. Occasionally, changes need to be
made to the way that the Record Layer itself encodes data.
For this, the same database header that records the applica-
tion metadata version also records a storage format version,
which is updated at the same time. Updating may entail re-
formatting small amounts of data or, in some cases, enabling
a compatibility mode for old formats. We also maintain an
“application version” for use by the client that can be used
to track data evolution that is not captured by the metadata
alone. For example, a nested record type might be promoted
to a top-level record type as part of data renormalization.
The application version allows checking for these changes
as part of opening the record store instead of implementing
checks in the application code. If a series of such changes
occur, the version can also be used as a counter tracking how
far along we are in applying the changes to the record store.
6 INDEX DEFINITION AND
MAINTENANCE
Record Layer indexes are durable data structures that support
efficient access to data, or possibly some function of the data,
and can be maintained in a streaming fashion, i.e., updated
incrementally when a record is inserted, updated, or deleted
using only the contents of that record. Index maintenance
occurs in the same transaction as the record change itself, en-
suring that indexes are always consistent with the data. Our
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1792

===== PAGE 7 =====
ability to do this efficiently relies heavily on FoundationDB’s
fast multi-key transactions. Efficient index scans use Foun-
dationDB’s range reads and rely on the lexicographic or-
dering of stored keys. Each index is stored in a dedicated
subspace within the record store so that indexes can be re-
moved cheaply using FoundationDB’s range clear operation.
Indexes may be configured with one or more index filters,
which allow records to be conditionally excluded from in-
dex maintenance, effectively creating a “sparse” index and
potentially reducing storage space and maintenance costs.
Index maintenance. Defining an index type requires imple-
menting an index maintainer tasked with updating the index
when records change. The Record Layer provides built-in in-
dex maintainers for a variety of index types (Section 7). The
index maintainer abstraction is directly exposed to clients,
allowing them to define custom index types.
When a record is saved, we first check if a record already
exists with the same primary key. If so, registered index
maintainers remove or update associated index entries for
the old record, and the old record is deleted from the record
store. A range clear to delete the old record is necessary as
records can be split across multiple keys. Next, we insert the
new record into the record store. Finally, registered index
maintainers insert or update any associated index entries
for the new record. We use a variety of optimizations during
index maintenance; for example, if an existing record and
a new record are of the same type and some of the indexed
fields are the same, the unchanged indexes are not updated.
Online index building. The Record Layer includes an on-
line index builder used to build or rebuild indexes in the
background. To ensure that an index is not used before it is
fully built, indexes begin in a write-only state where writes
maintain the index but it cannot be used to satisfy queries.
The index builder then scans the record store and instructs
the index maintainer for that index to update the index for
each encountered record. When the index build completes,
the index is marked as readable, the normal state where the
index is maintained by writes and usable by queries. Index
building is split into multiple transactions to reduce conflicts
with concurrent mutations and avoid transaction size limits.
Indexes are defined by an index type and a key expression,
which defines a function from a record to one or more tuples
consumed by the index maintainer and used to form the index
key. The Record Layer includes a variety of key expressions
(see Appendix A) and allows clients to define custom ones.
7 INDEX TYPES
The type of an index determines which predicates it can be
used to evaluate. The Record Layer supports a variety of in-
dex types, many of which make use of specific FoundationDB
features. Clients can define their own index types by imple-
menting and registering custom key expressions and index
maintainers (see Section 6). In this Section, we outline the
VALUE, Atomic Mutation and VERSION indexes. Appendix B
describes the RANK and TEXT index types, used for dynamic
order statistics and full-text indexing respectively.
Unlike in traditional relational systems, indexes can span
multiple record types, in which case any fields referenced
by the key expression must exist in all of the index’s record
types. Such indexes allow for efficient searches across differ-
ent record types with a common set of search criteria.
VALUE Indexes. The default VALUE index type provides a
standard mapping from index entry (a single field or a com-
bination of field values) to record primary key. Scanning the
index can be used to satisfy many common predicates, e.g.,
to find all primary keys where an indexed field’s value is less
than or equal to a given value.
Atomic mutation indexes. Atomic mutation indexes are
implemented using FoundationDB’s atomic mutations, de-
scribed in Section 2. These indexes are generally used to
support aggregate statistics and queries. For example, the
SUM index type stores the sum of a field’s value over all
records in a record store, where the field is defined in the
index’s key expression. In this case, the index contains a
single entry, mapping the index subspace path to the sum
value. The key expression could also include one or more
grouping fields, in which case the index contains a sum for
each value of the grouping field. While the maintenance of
such an index could be implemented by reading the current
index value, updating it with a new value, and writing it back
to the index, such an implementation would not scale, as any
two concurrent record updates would necessarily conflict.
Instead, the index is updated using FoundationDB’s atomic
mutations (e.g., the ADD mutation for the SUM index), which
do not conflict with other mutations.
The Record Layer currently supports the following atomic
mutation index types, tracking different aggregate metrics:
• COUNT - number of records
• COUNT UPDATES - num. times a field has been updated
• COUNT NON NULL- num. records where a field isn’t null
• SUM - summation of a field’s value across all records
• MAX (MIN) EVER - max (min) value ever assigned to a
field, over all records, since the index has been created
Note that these indexes have a relatively low foot-print com-
pared to VALUE indexes as they only write a single key for
each grouping key, or, in its absence, a single key for each
record store. However, a small number of index keys that
need to be updated on each write can lead to high write
traffic on those keys, causing high CPU and I/O usage for
the FoundationDB storage servers that hold them. This can
also result in increased read latency for clients attempting
to read from these servers.
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1793

===== PAGE 8 =====
FoundationDB Key Space
User 1
metadataindexesdata
metadataindexesdata
metadataindexesdata
metadataindexesdata
metadataindexesdata
User 2 User 3
metadataindexesdata
metadataindexesdata
metadataindexesdata
…
Metadata Store 
(Schema)
CloudKit Service
Record Layer
CloudKit Service
Record Layer
CloudKit Service
Record Layer
CloudKit Service
Record Layer
Device Service / Routing
application 1record store:
application 4record store:
application 7record store:
application 1record store:
application 4record store:application 3record store:
application 3record store:
application 10record store:
cloudkit-keyspace
user 1 
application 1 
(zone1, rec1-primary-key)
data 
index 
application 2
(zone1, rec2-primary-key)
(zone2, rec3-primary-key)
record store
Figure 3: CloudKit architecture using the Record Layer.
VERSION. VERSION indexes are similar to VALUE indexes in
that each has an index entry that maps to a primary key. How-
ever, a VERSION index allows the index’s key expression to
include a special “version” field: a 12 byte value representing
the commit version of the last update to the indexed record.
The version is guaranteed to be unique and monotonically
increasing with time within a single FoundationDB cluster.
The first 10 bytes are assigned by the FoundationDB servers
upon commit, and only the last 2 bytes are assigned by the
Record Layer, using a counter maintained by the Record
Layer per transaction. Since versions are assigned in this
way for each record insert and update, each record stored in
the cluster has a unique version.
Since the version is only known upon commit, it is not
included within the record’s Protocol Buffer representation.
Instead, the Record Layer writes a mapping from the primary
key of each record to its associated version in the keyspace
adjacent to the records so that both can be retrieved effi-
ciently with a single range-read.
Version indexes expose the total ordering of operations
within a FoundationDB cluster. For example, a client can scan
a prefix of a version index and be sure that it can continue
scanning from the same point and observe all the newly
written data. The following section describes how CloudKit
uses this index type to implement change-tracking (sync).
8 USE CASE: CLOUDKIT
CloudKit [43] is Apple’s cloud backend service and applica-
tion development framework, providing much of the back-
bone for storage, management, and synchronization of data
across devices as well as sharing and collaboration between
users. We describe how CloudKit uses FoundationDB and the
Record Layer, allowing it to support applications requiring
more advanced features such as the transactional indexing
and query capabilities described in this paper.
Within CloudKit a given application is represented by
a logical container, defined by a schema that specifies the
record types, typed fields, and indexes that are needed to
facilitate efficient record access and queries. The application
clients store records within named zones. Zones organize
records into logical groups which can be selectively synced
across client devices.
CloudKit assigns a unique FoundationDB subspace for
each user, and defines a record store within that subspace for
each application accessed by the user. This means that Cloud-
Kit is effectively maintaining(# users)×(# applications) logi-
cal databases, each with their own records, indexes, and other
metadata. CloudKit maintains billions of such databases.
When requests are received from client devices, they are
routed and load balanced across a pool of available CloudKit
Service processes which access the appropriate Record Layer
record store and service the request.
CloudKit translates the application schema into a Record
Layer metadata definition and stores it in a metadata store
(depicted in Figure 3). The metadata also includes attributes
added by CloudKit such as system fields tracking record cre-
ation and modification time and the zone in which the record
was written. The zone name is added as a prefix to primary
keys, allowing efficient per-zone access to records. In addi-
tion to user-defined indexes, CloudKit maintains a number of
“system” indexes, such as an index tracking the total record
size by record type that is used for quota management.
8.1 New CloudKit Capabilities
CloudKit was initially implemented using Cassandra [6] as
the underlying storage engine. To support atomic multi-
record operation batches within a zone, CloudKit uses Cas-
sandra’s light-weight transactions [3]: all updates to the zone
are serialized using Cassandra’s compare-and-set (CAS) op-
erations on a dedicated per-zone update-counter. This im-
plementation suffices for many applications using CloudKit,
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1794

===== PAGE 9 =====
Cassandra Record Layer
Transactions Within Zone Within Cluster
Concurrency Zone level Record level
Zone size limit Cassandra FoundationDB
partition size (GBs) cluster size
Index Consistency Eventual Transactional
Indexes Stored in Solr in FoundationDB
Table 1: CloudKit on Cassandra and the Record Layer.
but it has two scalability limitations. First, there is no con-
currency within a zone, even for operations making changes
to different records. Second, multi-record atomic operations
are scoped to a single Cassandra partition, which is limited
in size; furthermore, Cassandra’s performance deteriorates
as the size of a partition grows. The former is a concern for
collaborative applications, where data is shared among many
users or client devices. These limitations require application
designers to carefully model their data and workload such
that records updated together reside in the same zone while
making sure that zones do not grow too large and that the
rate of concurrent updates is minimized.
The implementation of CloudKit on FoundationDB and
the Record Layer addresses both issues, as summarized in
Table 1. Transactions are scoped to the entire database, al-
lowing CloudKit zones to grow significantly larger than be-
fore and supporting concurrent updates to different records
within a zone. Leveraging these new transactional capabil-
ities, CloudKit now exposes interactive transactions to its
clients, specifically to other backend services that access
CloudKit through gRPC [2]. This simplifies the implementa-
tion of client applications and has enabled many new clients
to use CloudKit.
Previously, only very few “system” indexes were main-
tained transactionally by CloudKit in Cassandra, whereas
all user-defined secondary indexes were maintained in Solr.
Due to high access latencies, these indexes are updated asyn-
chronously, and queries that use them obtain an eventually
consistent view of the data which requires application de-
signers to work around perceived inconsistencies. With the
Record Layer, user-defined secondary indexes are maintained
transactionally with updates, so all queries return the latest
data.
Personalized full-text search. Users expect instant access
to data they create such as emails, text messages, and notes.
Often, indexed text and other data are interleaved, so trans-
actional semantics are important. We implemented a per-
sonalized text indexing system using the TEXT index primi-
tives described in Appendix B that now serves millions of
users. Unlike traditional search indexing systems, all updates
are performed tranactionally, and no background jobs are
needed to perform index updates and deletes. In addition to
providing a consistent view of the data, this approach also
reduces operational costs by storing all data in one system.
Our system uses FoundationDB’s key order to support prefix
matching with no additional overhead and n-gram searches
that require only n key entries instead of the usual O(n2)
keys needed to index all possible sub-strings. The system
also supports proximity and phrase search.
High-concurrency zones. With Cassandra, CloudKit main-
tains a secondary “sync” index from the values of the per-
zone update-counter to changed records [43]. Scanning this
index allows CloudKit perform a sync operation that brings
a mobile device up-to-date with the latest changes to a zone.
The implementation of CloudKit using the Record Layer re-
lies on FoundationDB’s concurrency control and no longer
maintains an update-counter that creates conflicts between
otherwise non-conflicting transactions. To implement a sync
index, CloudKit leverages the total order on FoundationDB’s
commit versions by using a VERSION index, mapping ver-
sions to record identifiers. To perform a sync, CloudKit sim-
ply scans the VERSION index.
However, versions assigned by different FoundationDB
clusters are uncorrelated. This introduces a challenge when
migrating data from one cluster to another, e.g., when mov-
ing users between clusters to improve load balancing and
locality. The sync index must represent the order of updates
across all clusters, so updates committed after the move must
be sorted after updates committed before the move. CloudKit
addresses this with an application-level per-user count of the
number of moves, called the incarnation. Initially, the incar-
nation is 1, and it is incremented each time the user’s data is
moved to a different cluster. On every record update, we write
the user’s current incarnation to the record’s header; these
values are not modified during a move. The VERSION sync
index maps (incarnation, version) pairs to changed records,
sorting the changes first by incarnation, then version.
When deploying this implementation, we needed to han-
dle existing data with an associated update-counter value
but no version. Instead of using business logic to combine
the old and new sync indexes, we used the
function key
expression (see Section A) to make this migration opera-
tionally straightforward, transparent to the application, and
free of legacy code. Specifically, the VERSION index maps a
function of the incarnation, version, and update counter
value to a changed record, where the function is (incarnation,
version) if the record was last updated with the new method
and (0, update counter value) otherwise. This maintains the
order of records written using update counters and sorts all
such records before records written with the new method.
8.2 Client Resource Isolation
CloudKit services a very large number of concurrent requests,
and it is vital that no one client or application overwhelms the
system or impacts the performance of others. A number of
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1795

===== PAGE 10 =====
Record Layer features were explicitly designed to ensure that
individual requests consume a bounded amount of resources.
First, the Record Layer is designed to minimize the over-
head of operations on top of the underlying key-value store.
To illustrate this, we determined the median number of Foun-
dationDB keys that were read or written while executing
various common CloudKit operations. A query operation,
which returns all records that match a given query, reads
an average of∼38.3 keys, of which∼6.2 are not the records
or index entries themselves, for a total overhead of ∼15%.
Simple requests for individual records are comparatively ex-
pensive, with an average of∼13.3 key read of which∼7.7
are not for record data. This reflects the general focus of
CloudKit on providing higher level services, such as queries
and synchronization over individual CRUD requests.
For record save operations, it is more complicated to prop-
erly estimate the overhead. For one, write overhead is dom-
inated by the overhead of maintaining indexes, which de-
pends on the number of indexes defined on the record’s type.
Furthermore, FoundationDB’s commit time for write transac-
tions does not have a simple relationship with the number of
writes. The FoundationDB client buffers writes locally until
commit time, when it ships all writes to the server along with
the set of conflict ranges for the transaction. In practice, the
write performance depends substantially on the number of
conflicts produced rather than simply the number of writes.
On average, a CloudKit transaction writes∼8.5 records and
makes∼34.5 key writes associated with indexes, so the total
index overhead is approximately∼4 writes per record.
Today, the Record Layer does not provide the ability to
perform in-memory query operations, such as hash joins,
grouping, aggregation, or sorts. Operations such as sorting
and joining must be assisted by appropriate index defini-
tions. For example, efficient joins between records can be
facilitated by defining an index across multiple record types
on common field names. While this does impose some addi-
tional burden on the application developer, it ensures that
the memory needed to complete a given request is limited to
little more than the records accessed by the query. However,
this approach may require a potentially unbounded amount
of I/O to implement a given query. For this, we leverage the
Record Layer’s ability to enforce limits on the total number
of records or bytes read while servicing a request. When one
of these limits is reached, the complete state of the opera-
tion is serialized and returned to the client as a continuation.
The client may re-submit the operation with the continua-
tion to resume the operation. Because these operations are
small, rate-based throttling mechanisms work more effec-
tively. With these limits, continuations, and throttling, we
ensure that all clients make some progress even when the
system comes under stress.
9 RELATED WORK
Traditional relational databases offer many features includ-
ing structured storage, schema management, ACID trans-
actions, user-defined indexes, and SQL queries that make
use of these indexes with the help of a query planner and
execution engine. These systems typically scale for read
workloads but were not designed to efficiently handle trans-
actional workloads on distributed data [37]. For example, in
shared-nothing database architectures cross-shard transac-
tions and indexes are prohibitively expensive and careful
data partitioning, a difficult task for a complex application,
is required. This led to research on automatic data partition-
ing, e.g., [31, 40]. Shared-disk architectures are much more
difficult to scale, primarily due to expensive cache coherence
and database page contention protocols [33].
With the advent of Big Data, as well as to minimize costs,
NoSQL datastores [13, 15, 25, 28, 32, 44] offer the other end of
the spectrum—excellent scalability but minimal semantics—
typically providing a key-value API with no schema, index-
ing, transactions, or queries. As a result, applications needed
to re-implement many of the features provided by a relational
database. To fill the void, middle-ground “NewSQL datas-
tores” appeared offering scalability as well as richer feature-
sets and semantics [7, 8, 10, 12, 18, 29]. For example, Google’s
Spanner [29] supports ACID transactions, application-defined
schema, and a SQL-based query language; secondary indexes
and distributed queries were also added, more recently [21].
FoundationDB [10] takes a unique approach in the NewSQL
space: it is highly scalable and provides ACID transactions,
but it offers a simple key-value API with no built-in data
model, indexing, or queries. This choice allowed Founda-
tionDB to build a powerful, stable and performant storage
engine without attempting to implement a one-size-fits-all
solution. It was designed to be the foundation while layers
built on top (implemented as client-side libraries) such as
the Record Layer, provide higher-level abstractions.
Multiple systems implement transactions on top of under-
lying NoSQL stores [9, 16, 22, 24, 34, 35, 41, 46]. The Record
Layer makes use of transactions exposed by FoundationDB
to implement structured storage, complete with secondary
indexes, queries, and more. Like Google Percolator [41] the
Record Layer is completely stateless, keeping all its metadata
in the underlying FoundationDB data store.
The Record Layer has unique first-class support for multi-
tenancy while most systems face the extreme challenge of
retrofittig it. Salesforce’s architecture [
17] is similarly mo-
tivated by the need to support multi-tenancy within the
database. For example, all data and metadata are sharded by
application, and query optimization considers statistics col-
lected per application and user. The Record Layer takes multi-
tenancy support further through built-in resource tracking
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1796

===== PAGE 11 =====
and isolation, a completely stateless design, and the record
store abstraction. For example, CloudKit faces a dual multi-
tenancy challenge as it services many applications, each with
a very large user-base. Each record store encapsulates all
of a user’s data for one application, including indexes and
metadata. This choice makes it easy to scale the system to
billions of users by simply adding more clusters and moving
record stores to balance the load and improve locality.
While many storage systems include support for full-
text search, most provide this support using a separate sys-
tem [14, 17, 43], such as Solr [1], with eventual-consistency
guarantees. In our experience with CloudKit, maintaining a
separate system for search is challenging; it has to be sepa-
rately provisioned, maintained, and made highly-available
in concert with the database (e.g., with regards to fail-over
decisions). MongoDB includes built-in support for full-text
search, but indexes are not guaranteed to be consistent and
so queries might not return all matching documents [5].
There is a broad literature on query optimization, starting
with the seminal work of Selinger et al. [ 42] on System R.
Since then, much of the focus has been on efficient search-
space exploration. Most notably, Cascades [36] introduced
a clean rule-based architecture for structuring query plan-
ners and proposed operators and transformation rules that
are encapsulated as self-contained components. Cascades
allows logically equivalent expressions to be grouped in
the so-called Memo structure to eliminate redundant work.
Recently, Greenplum’s Orca query optimizer [45] was devel-
oped as a modern incarnation of Cascades’ principles. We
are currently in the process of developing an optimizer that
uses the proven principles of Cascades, paving the way for
the development of a full cost-based optimizer (Appendix C).
10 LESSONS LEARNED
The Record Layer’s success at Apple validates the useful-
ness of FoundationDB’s “layer” concept, where the core dis-
tributed storage system provides a semantically simple data-
store upon which complex abstractions are built. This allows
systems architects to choose the parts of the database that
they need without working around abstractions that they
do not. Building layers, however, remains a complex engi-
neering challenge. To our knowledge, the Record Layer is
deployed at a larger scale than any other FoundationDB layer.
We summarize some lessons learned building and operating
the Record Layer in the hope that they can be useful for both
Record Layer adopters and developers of new layers.
10.1 Building FoundationDB layers
Asynchronous processing to hide latency. FoundationDB is
optimized for throughput and not individual operation la-
tencies, meaning that effective use requires keeping as much
work outstanding as possible. Therefore, the Record Layer
does much of its work asynchronously, pipelining it where
possible. However, the FoundationDB client is single-threaded,
with only a single network thread that talks to the cluster.
Earlier versions of the Java bindings completed futures in
the network thread, and the Record Layer used these for
its asynchronous work, creating a bottleneck in that thread.
By minimizing the amount of work done in the network
thread, we were able to get substantially better performance
and minimimze apparent latency on complex operations by
interacting with the key-value store in parallel.
Conflict ranges. In FoundationDB, a transaction conflict
occurs when some keys read by one transaction are concur-
rently modified by another. The FoundationDB API gives full
control over these potentially overlapping read- and write-
conflict sets. One pattern is then to do a non-conflicting
(snapshot) read of a range that potentially contains distin-
guished keys and adding individual conflicts for only these
and not the unrelated keys found in the same range. Thus, the
transaction depends only on what would invalidate its results.
In the Record Layer, this technique is used for navigating
the skip list used for the rank index described in Appendix B.
Bugs due to incorrect manual conflict ranges are very hard
to find, especially when mixed with business logic. For that
reason, layers should generally define abstractions, such as
indexes, for such patterns rather than relying on individual
client applications to relax isolation requirements.
10.2 Using the Record Layer in practice
Metadata change safety. The Protocol Buffer compiler gen-
erates methods for manipulating, parsing and writing mes-
sages, as well as static descriptor objects containing informa-
tion about the message type, such as its fields and their types.
These descriptors could potentially be used to build Record
Layer metadata in code. We do not recommend this approach
over explicitly persisting the metadata in a metadata store,
except for simple tests. One reason is that it is hard to atom-
ically update the metadata code used by multiple Record
Layer instances. For example, if one Record Layer instance
runs a newer version of the code (with a newer descriptor),
writes records to a record store, then an instance running
the old version of the code attempts to read it, an authorita-
tive metadata store (or communication between instances)
is needed to interpret the data. This method also makes it
harder to check that the schema evolution constraints (Sec-
tion 5) are preserved. We currently use descriptor objects to
generate new metadata to be stored in the metadata store.
Relational similarities. The Record Layer resembles a re-
lational database but has sightly different semantics, which
can surprise clients. For example, there is a single extent for
all record types because CloudKit has untyped foreign-key
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1797

===== PAGE 12 =====
references without a “table” association. By default, select-
ing all records of a particular type requires a full scan that
skips over records of other types or maintaining secondary
indexes. For clients with a SQL-like table model, we now
support emulating separate extents for each record type by
adding a type-specific prefix to the primary key.
10.3 Designing for multi-tenancy
Multi-tenancy is remarkably difficult to add to an existing
system. Hence, the Record Layer was built from the ground
up to support massively multi-tenant use cases. We have
gained substantial advantages from a natively multi-tenant
design, including easier shard rebalancing between clusters
and the ability to scale elastically. Our experience has led us
to conclude that multi-tenancy is more pervasive than one
would initially think. Put another way, many applications
that do not explicitly host many different applications—as
CloudKit does—can reap the benefits of a multi-tenant ar-
chitecture by partitioning data according to logical “tenants”
such as users, application functions, or some other entity.
11 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The Record Layer’s current feature set grew out of CloudKit’s
need to support billions of small databases, each with few
users, and all with careful resource constraints. As databases
grow in terms of data volume and number of concurrent
users, the Record Layer may need to adapt and higher lay-
ers will be developed to support these new workloads and
more complex query capabilities. However, we aim to ensure
that the layer always retains its support for lightweight and
efficient deployments. We highlight several future directions:
A voiding hotspots.As the number of clients simultaneously
accessing a given record store increases, checking the store
header to confirm that the metadata has not changed may
create a hot key. A general way to address hotspots is to repli-
cate data at different points of the keyspace, making it likely
that the copies are located on different storage nodes. For
the particular case of metadata, where changes are relatively
infrequent, we could also alleviate hotspots with caching.
However, when the metadata changes, such caches need to
be invalidated, or, alternatively, an out-of-date cache needs
to be detected or tolerated.
Query operations. Some query operations are possible with
less-than-perfect indexing but within the layer’s streaming
model, such as a priority queue-based sort-with-small-limit
or a limited-size hash join. For certain workloads, it may
be necessary to fully support intensive in-memory opera-
tions with spill-over to persistent storage. Such functionality
can be challenging at scale as it requires new forms of re-
source tracking and management and must be stateful for
the duration of the query.
Materialized views. Normal indexes are a projection of
record fields in a different order. COUNT, SUM, MIN, and MAX
indexes maintain aggregates compactly and efficiently, avoid-
ing conflicts by using atomic mutations. Adding materialized
views, which can synthesize data from multiple records at
once, is a natural evolution that would benefit join queries,
among others. Adding support for materialized views to the
key expressions API might also help the query planner rea-
son about whether an index can be used to satisfy a query.
Higher layers. The Record Layer is close enough to a re-
lational database that it could support a subset or variant
of SQL, particularly once the query planner supports joins.
A higher level “SQL layer” could be implemented as a sep-
arate layer on top of the Record Layer without needing to
work around choices made by lower-level layers. Similarly, a
higher layer could support OLAP-style analytics workloads.
12 CONCLUSIONS
The FoundationDB Record Layer offers rich features sim-
ilar to those of a relational database, including structured
schema, indexing, and declarative queries. Because it is built
on FounationDB, it inherits its ACID transactions, reliability,
and performance. The core record store abstraction encapsu-
lates a database and makes it easy to operate the Record Layer
in a massively multi-tenant environment. The Record Layer
offers deep extensibility, allowing clients to add features such
as custom index types. At Apple, we leverage these capabil-
ities to implement CloudKit, which uses the Record Layer
to offer new features (e.g., transactional full-text indexing),
speed up key operations (e.g., with high-concurrency zones),
and simplify application development (e.g., with interactive
transactions) across billions of databases.
In building and operating the Record Layer at scale, we
have made three key observations with broader applicability.
First, the Record Layer’s success validates FoundationDB’s
layered architecture in a large-scale system. Second, the
Record Layer’s extensible design provides common function-
ality while easily accommodating the customization needs of
complex clients. It is easy to envision other layers that extend
the Record Layer to provide rich, high-level functionality,
as CloudKit does. Lastly, we find that organizing applica-
tions into logical “tenants”, which might be users, features,
or some other entity, is a powerful and practically useful way
to structure a system and scale it to meet demand.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Lyublena Antova and the anonymous reviewers
for their insights and suggestions that helped us improve
this paper. We are grateful to Mike Abbott, Bryan Davis,
Eric Krugler, and Amol Pattekar for their guidance and sup-
port. Finally, we thank Ben Collins, Evan Tschannen and the
FoundationDB team at Apple for their expertise.
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1798

===== PAGE 13 =====
REFERENCES
[1] Apache Solr. http://lucene.apache.org/solr/.
[2] gRPC: A high performance, open-source universal RPC framework.
https://grpc.io/.
[3] Lightweight transactions in Cassandra 2.0. https://www.datastax.com/
dev/blog/lightweight-transactions-in-cassandra-2-0.
[4] Protocol Buffers. https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/.
[5]
MongoDB queries don’t always return all matching documents!
https://blog.meteor.com/mongodb-queries-dont-always-return-all-
matching-documents-654b6594a827, 2016.
[6] Apache Cassandra, 2018.
[7]
Azure Cosmos DB. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/
cosmos-db/, 2018.
[8] Cockroach Labs. https://www.cockroachlabs.com/, 2018.
[9] CockroachDB. https://www.cockroachlabs.com/, 2018.
[10] FoundationDB. https://www.foundationdb.org, 2018.
[11] FoundationDB source. https://github.com/apple/foundationdb, 2018.
[12] MemSQL. https://www.memsql.com/, 2018.
[13] MongoDB. https://www.mongodb.com, 2018.
[14]
Riak: Complex Query Support. http://basho.com/products/riak-kv/
complex-query-support, 2018.
[15] Riak KV. http://basho.com/products/riak-kv, 2018.
[16] Tephra: Transactions for Apache HBase. https://tephra.io, 2018.
[17]
The Force.com Multitenant Architecture. http://www.developerforce.
com/media/ForcedotcomBookLibrary/Force.com_Multitenancy_
WP_101508.pdf, 2018.
[18] VoltDB. https://www.voltdb.com/, 2018.
[19] Announcing the FoundationDB Record Layer. https://www.
foundationdb.org/blog/announcing-record-layer/, 2019.
[20] FoundationDB Record Layer on GitHub. https://github.com/
foundationdb/fdb-record-layer, 2019.
[21] D. F. Bacon, N. Bales, N. Bruno, B. F. Cooper, A. Dickinson, A. Fikes,
C. Fraser, A. Gubarev, M. Joshi, E. Kogan, A. Lloyd, S. Melnik, R. Rao,
D. Shue, C. Taylor, M. van der Holst, and D. Woodford. Spanner:
Becoming a sql system. In Proc. SIGMOD 2017, 2017.
[22] J. Baker, C. Bond, J. C. Corbett, J. Furman, A. Khorlin, J. Larson, J.-M.
Leon, Y. Li, A. Lloyd, and V. Yushprakh. Megastore: Providing Scalable,
Highly Available Storage for Interactive Services. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Innovative Data system Research (CIDR), pages 223–234,
2011.
[23] K. Birman, D. Malkhi, and R. van Renesse. Virtually Synchronous
Methodology for Dynamic Service Replication. Technical report, Mi-
crosoft Research, 2010.
[24] E. Bortnikov, E. Hillel, I. Keidar, I. Kelly, M. Morel, S. Paranjpye, F. Perez-
Sorrosal, and O. Shacham. Omid, Reloaded: Scalable and Highly-
Available Transaction Processing. In 15th USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies, FAST 2017, Santa Clara, CA, USA, February
27 - March 2, 2017, pages 167–180, 2017.
[25] F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W. C. Hsieh, D. A. Wallach, M. Bur-
rows, T. Chandra, A. Fikes, and R. E. Gruber. Bigtable: A Distributed
Storage System for Structured Data. In 7th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), pages 205–218,
2006.
[26] G. V. Chockler, I. Keidar, and R. Vitenberg. Group communication
specifications: a comprehensive study. ACM Comput. Surv., 33(4):427–
469, 2001.
[27] G. V. Chockler and D. Malkhi. Active Disk Paxos with infinitely many
processes. Distributed Computing, 18(1):73–84, 2005.
[28] B. F. Cooper, R. Ramakrishnan, U. Srivastava, A. Silberstein, P. Bohan-
non, H. Jacobsen, N. Puz, D. Weaver, and R. Yerneni. PNUTS: Yahoo!’s
hosted data serving platform. PVLDB, 1(2):1277–1288, 2008.
[29] J. C. Corbett, J. Dean, M. Epstein, A. Fikes, C. Frost, J. J. Furman, S. Ghe-
mawat, A. Gubarev, C. Heiser, P. Hochschild, W. Hsieh, S. Kanthak,
E. Kogan, H. Li, A. Lloyd, S. Melnik, D. Mwaura, D. Nagle, S. Quin-
lan, R. Rao, L. Rolig, Y. Saito, M. Szymaniak, C. Taylor, R. Wang, and
D. Woodford. Spanner: Google’s Globally Distributed Database. ACM
Trans. Comput. Syst., 31(3):8:1–8:22, Aug. 2013.
[30] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein. Introduction
to Algorithms, Third Edition, chapter 14.1. The MIT Press, 2009.
[31] C. Curino, Y. Zhang, E. P. C. Jones, and S. Madden. Schism: a Workload-
Driven Approach to Database Replication and Partitioning. PVLDB,
3(1):48–57, 2010.
[32] G. DeCandia, D. Hastorun, M. Jampani, G. Kakulapati, A. Lakshman,
A. Pilchin, S. Sivasubramanian, P. Vosshall, and W. Vogels. Dynamo:
amazon’s highly available key-value store. In Proceedings of the 21st
ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles 2007, SOSP 2007,
Stevenson, Washington, USA, October 14-17, 2007, pages 205–220, 2007.
[33] D. DeWitt and J. Gray. Parallel Database Systems: The Future of High
Performance Database Systems. Commun. ACM, 35(6), June 1992.
[34] R. Escriva, B. Wong, and E. G. Sirer. Warp: Lightweight Multi-Key
Transactions for Key-Value Stores. CoRR, abs/1509.07815, 2015.
[35] D. G. Ferro, F. Junqueira, I. Kelly, B. Reed, and M. Yabandeh. Omid:
Lock-free transactional support for distributed data stores. In IEEE
30th International Conference on Data Engineering, Chicago, ICDE 2014,
IL, USA, March 31 - April 4, 2014, pages 676–687, 2014.
[36] G. Graefe. The Cascades Framework for Query Optimization. Data
Engineering Bulletin, 18, 1995.
[37] J. Gray, P. Helland, P. O’Neil, and D. Shasha. The dangers of replication
and a solution. In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, 1996.
[38] P. Hunt, M. Konar, F. P. Junqueira, and B. Reed. ZooKeeper: Wait-
free Coordination for Internet-scale Systems. In 2010 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference, Boston, MA, USA, June 23-25, 2010, 2010.
[39] H. Melville. Moby Dick; or The Whale. http://www.gutenberg.org/files/
2701.
[40] A. Pavlo, C. Curino, and S. Zdonik. Skew-aware Automatic Data-
base Partitioning in Shared-nothing, Parallel OLTP Systems. In Proc.
SIGMOD 2012.
[41] D. Peng and F. Dabek. Large-scale Incremental Processing Using
Distributed Transactions and Notifications. In In the 9th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2010.
[42] P. G. Selinger, M. M. Astrahan, D. D. Chamberlin, R. A. Lorie, and T. G.
Price. Access Path Selection in a Relational Database Management Sys-
tem. In Proceedings of the 1979 ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’79, 1979.
[43] A. Shraer, A. Aybes, B. Davis, C. Chrysafis, D. Browning, E. Krugler,
E. Stone, H. Chandler, J. Farkas, J. Quinn, J. Ruben, M. Ford, M. McMa-
hon, N. Williams, N. Favre-Felix, N. Sharma, O. Herrnstadt, P. Seligman,
R. Pisolkar, S. Dugas, S. Gray, S. Lu, S. Harkema, V. Kravtsov, V. Hong,
Y. Tian, and W. L. Yih. Cloudkit: Structured Storage for Mobile Appli-
cations. Proc. VLDB Endow., 11(5):540–552, Jan. 2018.
[44] S. Sivasubramanian. Amazon dynamoDB: a seamlessly scalable non-
relational database service. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD Inter-
national Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2012, Scottsdale,
AZ, USA, May 20-24, 2012, pages 729–730, 2012.
[45] M. A. Soliman, L. Antova, V. Raghavan, A. El-Helw, Z. Gu, E. Shen,
G. C. Caragea, C. Garcia-Alvarado, F. Rahman, M. Petropoulos, F. Waas,
S. Narayanan, K. Krikellas, and R. Baldwin. Orca: A Modular Query
Optimizer Architecture for Big Data. In Proc. SIGMOD 2014.
[46] Z. Wei, G. Pierre, and C.-H. Chi. Cloudtps: Scalable transactions for
web applications in the cloud.IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
5(4):525–539, 2012.
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1799

===== PAGE 14 =====
A KEY EXPRESSIONS
Indexes are defined by an index type and a key expression
which defines a function from a record to one or more tuples
consumed by the index maintainer and used to form the index
key. The Record Layer includes a variety of key expressions
and also allows clients to define custom ones.
The simplest key expression is field. When evaluated
against the sample record in Figure 4, field ("id") yields
the tuple (1066). Unlike standard SQL columns, Protocol
Buffer fields permit repeated fields and nested messages.
Nested messages can be accessed through the nest key ex-
pression. For example,field("parent").nest("a") yields
(1415). To support repeated fields,field expressions define
an optional FanType parameter. For a repeated field,FanType
of Concatenate produces a tuple with one entry containing
a list of all values within the field, while Fanout produces a
separate tuple for each value. For example, field("elem",
Concatenate)) yields (["first", "second", "third"]) ,
and field("elem", Fanout)) yields three tuples:("first"),
("second"), and ("third").
To create compound indexes, multiple key expressions
can be concatenated. For example, concat(field("id"),
field("parent").nest("b")) evaluates to the single tu-
ple (1066, "child") . If a sub-expression produce multiple
values, the compound expression will produce the tuples in
the Cartesian product of the sub-expressions’ values.
The Record Layer also includes a variety of specialized
key expressions. For example, the record type key expression
produces a value that is guaranteed to be unique for each
record type. When used in a primary key, this key expression
allows users to treat record types like tables in a traditional
relational database. It can also be used to satisfy queries
about record types, such as a query for the number of records
of each type that are stored within the database. Another
special key expression, version, is described in Section 7.
In addition to allowing client-defined key expressions, the
Record Layer has function key expressions which allow for
the execution of arbitrary, user-defined functions against
records and their constituent fields. Function key expres-
sions are very powerful and allow users to define custom
sort orders for records, for example. The layer also includes
groupBy key expressions which can be used to divide an
message Example {
 message Nested {
  optional int64 a = 1;
  optional string b = 2;
 }
 optional int64 id = 1;
 repeated string elem = 2;
 optional Nested parent = 3;
}
{
 "id": 1066,
 "elem": ["ﬁrst", "second", "third"],
 "parent": {
  "a": 1415,
  "b": "child"
 }
}
Figure 4: Example record definition and an example.
Layer 0: prefix/0
Layer 1: prefix/1
Layer 2: prefix/2
1
/“a”
2
/“b”
1
/“c”
1
/“d”
1
/“e”
1
/“f”
1
/“a”
1
/“b”
3
/“d”
6
/“a”
(a) Each contiguous key range used in by the skip-list is rep-
resented by a blue line and prefixed with the leading prefix
of that subspace. Key-value pairs are shown as points on the
keyspace line with a key and value (with a grey background).
Layer 0: prefix/0
Layer 1: prefix/1
Layer 2: prefix/2
1
/“a”
2
/“b”
1
/“c”
1
/“d”
1
/“e”
1
/“f”
1
/“a”
1
/“b”
3
/“d”
6
/“a”
1
2
3
(b) An example of finding the rank for set element"e". Scans
of a range are shown with red arrows. (1) Scan the prefix/2
subspace and find only a, which comes before e. (2) Scan
scan the prefix/1 subspace. Use the same-level fingers from
(prefix,1,"a"), (prefix,1,"b"), contributing 1 and 2 to the
sum, respectively. The last set member found isd, which also
comes before e. (3) Scan the prefix/0 subspace and find e.
During our scan, use the same-level finger (prefix,0,"d")
which contributes 1 to the sum, yielding a total rank of 4
(the lowest ordinal rank is 0).
Figure 5: An example RANK index with 6 elements.
index into multiple sub-indexes and can be used for indexing
aggregations like SUM and COUNT. The KeyWithValue key ex-
pression has two sub-expressions, one of which is included
in the index entry’s key and the other of which is in the
entry’s value. Such indexes are used as covering indexes that
satisfy queries without resolving the indexed record.
B RANK AND TEXT INDEX TYPES
RANK indexes. The RANK index type provides efficient access
to records by their ordinal rank (according to some key ex-
pression) and conversely to determine the rank of a field’s
value. For example, in an application implementing a leader-
board, finding a player’s position in the leaderboard could be
implemented by determining their score’s rank using a RANK
index. Another example is an implementation of a scrollbar,
where data (e.g., query results) is sorted according to some
field and the user can request to skip to the middle of a long
page of results, e.g., to the k-th result. Instead of linearly
scanning until the k-th result is found, using continuations
to restart the scan if it runs too long, the client can query for
the record with rank k and begin scanning there.
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1800

===== PAGE 15 =====
Our implementation of the RANK index stores each in-
dex entry in a probabilistic augmented skip-list (Cormen
et al. [30] describe a tree-based variant) persisted in Foun-
dationDB such that each level has a distinct subspace prefix.
Duplicate keys are avoided by attempting to read each key
before inserting it. The lowest level of the skip-list includes
every index entry, and each higher level contains a sample of
entries in the level below it. For each level, each index entry
contains the number of entries in the set that are greater or
equal to it and less than the next entry in that level (all en-
tries in the lowest level have the value 1). This is the number
of entries skipped by following the skip-list “finger” between
one entry and the next. In practice, an explicit finger is not
needed: the sort order maintained by FoundationDB achieves
the same purpose much more efficiently. Figure 5(a) includes
a sample index representing a skip-list with six elements and
three levels.
To determine the ordinal rank of an entry, a standard
skip-list search is performed, starting from the highest level.
Whenever the search uses a finger connecting two nodes on
the same level, we accumulate the value of the first node,
i.e., the number of nodes being skipped. An example of this
computation is shown in Figure 5(b). The final sum repre-
sents the rank. Given a rank, a similar algorithm is used to
determine the corresponding index entry. A cumulative sum
is maintained and a range scan is performed at each level
until following a finger would cause the sum to exceed the
target rank, at which point the next level is scanned.
TEXT indexes. The TEXT index enables full-text queries
on the contents of string fields. This includes simple to-
ken matching, token prefix matching, proximity search, and
phrase search. The index stores tokens produced by a plug-
gable tokenizer using a text field as its input. Our inverted
index implementation is logically equivalent to an ordered
list of maps. Each map represents a postings list: it is associ-
ated with a token (tokeni) and the keys in the map are the
primary keys (pkj) of records containing that token in the
indexed text. Each value is a list of offsets in the text field
containing that token expressed as the number of tokens
from the beginning of the field. To determine which records
contain a given token, a range scan can be performed on
the index prefixed by that token to produce a list of primary
keys, one for each record that contains that token. One can
similarly find all records containing a token prefix. To filter
by token proximity or by phrase, the scan can examine the
relevant offset lists and filter out any record where the to-
kens are not within a given distance from each other or do
not appear in the correct order.
To store theTEXT index, we use one key for each token/pri-
mary key pair, with the offset list in the value:
( p r e f i x , token 1 , pk1 )→ o f f s e t s1
( p r e f i x , token 1 , pk2 )→ o f f s e t s2
( p r e f i x , token 2 pk 3 )→ o f f s e t s3
( p r e f i x , token 3 , pk4 )→ o f f s e t s4
( p r e f i x , token 3 , pk5 )→ o f f s e t s5
( p r e f i x , token 3 , pk6 )→ o f f s e t s6
Note that the prefix is repeated in each key. While this is
true for all indexes, the overhead is especially large for TEXT
indexes due to the large number of entries. To address this,
we reduce the number of index keys by “bunching” neigh-
boring keys together so that for a given token, there might
be multiple primary keys included in one index entry. Below
is an example with a bunch size of 2, i.e., each index entry
represents up to two primary keys.
( p r e f i x , token 1 , pk1 )→[ o f f s e t s1 , pk2 , o f f s e t s2 ]
( p r e f i x , token 2 , pk3 )→[ o f f s e t s3 ]
( p r e f i x , token 3 , pk4 )→[ o f f s e t s4 , pk5 , o f f s e t s5 ]
( p r e f i x , token 3 , pk6 )→[ o f f s e t s6 ]
To insert a token t and primary key pk, we perform a
range scan and find the biggest key L that is less or equal to
(prefix,t,pk) and the smallest keyR greater than(prefix,
t,pk). We then place a new entry in L’ if the insertion does
not cause this entry to exceed the maximum bunch size. If it
does, the biggest primary key in the bunch is removed (this
might be pk and its list of offsets) and is inserted in a new in-
dex key. If the size ofR’s bunch is smaller than the maximum
bunch size, the bunch is merged with the newly created one.
To delete the index entry for tokent and primary key pk, the
index maintainer performs a range scan in descending order
from (prefix,t,pk). The first key returned is guaranteed
to contain the data for t and pk. If pk is the only key in the
bunch, the entry is deleted. Otherwise, the entry is updated
such that pk and its offsets are removed from the bunch, and
if pk appears in the index key, the key is updated to contain
the next primary key in the bunch.
Inserting an entry requires reading two key-value pairs
and writing at most two (though usually only one). Deleting
an entry requires reading and writing a single key-value pair.
This access locality gives index updates predictable latencies
and resource consumption. However, certain write patterns
can result in many index entries where bunches are only
partially filled. Currently, deletes do not attempt to merge
smaller bunches together, although the client can request
compactions. Table 2 shows a worked calculation of the pos-
sible space savings for this approach. To demonstrate space
savings due to bunching, we used Melville’s Moby Dick [39],
broken up into 233∼5 kilobyte documents. With whitespace
tokenization, each document contains∼431.8 unique tokens
(so the primary key can be represented using 3 bytes) each
appearing an average of∼2.1 times within the document
and with an average length of∼7.8 characters. For the cal-
culation, we use 10 bytes as the prefix size (smaller than the
typical size we use in production). In practice, we find that
this index required∼4.9 kilobytes per document because not
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1801

===== PAGE 16 =====
No bunch Bunch size 20
Prefix 10 bytes 10 bytes
Token 7.8 bytes 7.8 bytes
Primary key 3 bytes 3 bytes
Encoding overhead 2 bytes 2 bytes
Key size 22.8 bytes 22.8 bytes
Offsets 3 bytes 2 bytes× 20 = 40 bytes
Primary keys — 3 bytes× 19 = 57 bytes
Value size 3 bytes 97 bytes
Total size / entry 25.8 bytes 119.8 bytes
Approx. # entries 431.8 431.8/20≈ 21.6
Total size / document 11.1 kB 2.6 kB
Table 2: Worked example illustrating the space sav-
ings provided by the bunched map.
every bunch is actually filled. In fact, the average bunch size
was∼4.7, significantly lower than the maximum possible
because some words appear rarely in the text–some even
only once. To optimize further, we could bunch across tokens.
An alternative would be to implement prefix compression
in FoundationDB, but even then, there is per-key overhead
in both the index and FoundationDB’s internal B-tree data
structure, so using fewer keys is still beneficial.
C QUERY PLANNING AND API
The Record Layer has extensive facilities for executing declar-
ative queries on a record store. While the planning and exe-
cution of declarative queries has been studied for decades,
the Record Layer makes certain unusual design decisions.
Extensible query API. The Record Layer has a fluent Java
API for querying the database by specifying the types of
records that should be retrieved, Boolean predicates that the
retrieved records must match, and a sort order specified by a
key expression (see Appendix A). Both filter and sort specifi-
cations can include “special functions” including aggregates,
cardinal rank, and full-text search operations like n-gram
and phrase search. This query language is akin to an abstract
syntax tree for a SQL-like text-based query language exposed
as an API, allowing consumers to directly interact with it in
Java. Another layer on top of the Record Layer could provide
translation from SQL or another query language.
Query plans. While declarative queries are convenient for
clients, they need to be transformed into concrete operations
such as index scans, union operations, and filters in order
to execute the queries efficiently. The Record Layer’s query
planner converts a declarative query specifying the records
to return into an efficient combination of operations on the
stream of records. The Record Layer exposes these query
plans through the planner’s API, allowing its clients to cache
or otherwise manipulate query plans directly. This provides
functionality similar to that of a SQL PREPARE statement but
with the additional benefit of allowing the client to modify
the plan if necessary [ 45]. Like SQL PREPARE statements,
queries (and thus, query plans) may have bound static argu-
ments (SARGS). In CloudKit we have leveraged this function-
ality to implement CloudKit-specific planning behavior by
combining multiple plans produced by the Record Layer and
binding the output of one plan to an argument of another.
Cascades-style planner.We are currently evolving the Record
Layer’s planner from an ad-hoc architecture to a Cascades-
style rule-based planner [36]. This new design supports deep
extensibility, including custom planning logic defined com-
pletely outside the Record Layer by clients. Internally, we
maintain a tree-structured intermediate representation (IR)
of partially-planned queries that includes a variety of ex-
pressions, including both logical operations (such as a sort
order needed to perform an interaction of two indexes) and
physical operations (such as scans of indexes, unions of
streams, and filters). We implement the planner’s function-
ality through a rich set of planner rules, which match to
particular structures in the IR tree, optionally inspect their
properties, and produce equivalent expressions.
Rules are automatically selected by the planner, but can be
organized into “phases”: for example, it is better to scan part
of an index than to filter all records. They are also meant to
be modular; several planner behaviors are implemented by
multiple rules acting in concert. While this architecture make
the code base easier to understand, its key benefit is allowing
complex planning behavior by combining the available rules.
The rule-based architecture allows clients, who may have
defined custom query functions and indexes, to plug in rules
for making use of that additional functionality. For example,
a client could implement a geospatial index, extend the query
API with custom functions for bounding box queries, and
write custom rules to plan geospatial filters as scan of the
geospatial index, all while making use of built-in rules.
Future directions. The experimental planner’s IR and rule
execution system were designed to anticipate future needs.
For example, the data structure used by the “expression”
intermediate representation currently stores only a single
expression at any time: this planner repeatedly rewrites the
IR each time a rule is applied. However, it could be seamlessly
replaced by the compact Memo data structure [ 36] which
succinctly represents a huge space of possible expressions.
The Memo structure replaces each node in the IR tree with
a group of logically equivalent expressions. Each group can
then be treated as an optimization target where each member
of the group represents a possible variant of the group’s
logical operation. Memo allows optimization work for a small
part of the query to be shared (or memoized) across many
possible expressions. Adding the Memo structure paves the
way to a cost-based optimizer, which uses estimates of a cost
metric to choose from several possible plans.
Industry 3: Data Platforms
 
SIGMOD ’19, June 30–July 5, 2019, Amsterdam, Netherlands
1802